© 2020 College Board. Visit College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org
Please note: Some of the questions in this former practice exam may 
no longer perfectly align with the AP exam. Even though these 
questions do not fully represent the 2020 exam, teachers indicate 
that imperfectly aligned questions still provide instructional value. 
Teachers can consult the Question Bank to determine the degree to 
which these questions align to the 2020 Exam.
This exam may not be posted on school or personal websites, nor 
electronically redistributed for any reason. This exam is provided by 
the College Board for AP Exam preparation. Teachers are permitted to 
download the materials and make copies to use with their students in a 
classroom setting only. To maintain the security of this exam, teachers 
should collect all materials after their administration and keep them in a 
secure location. 
Further distribution of these materials outside of the secure College 
Board site disadvantages teachers who rely on uncirculated 
questions for classroom testing. Any additional distribution is in 
violation of the College Board’s copyright policies and may result in the 
termination of Practice Exam access for your school as well as the 
removal of access to other online services such as the AP Teacher 
Community and Online Score Reports. 
2020


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Microeconomics
Practice Exam
From the 2019 Administration
This exam may not be posted on 
school or personal websites, nor 
electronically redistributed for 
any reason. This Released Exam is 
provided by the College Board for 
AP Exam preparation. Teachers are 
permitted to download the materials 
and make copies to use with their 
students in a classroom setting only. 
To maintain the security of this exam, 
teachers should collect all materials 
after their administration and keep 
them in a secure location. 
Further distribution of these 
materials outside of the secure 
College Board site disadvantages 
teachers who rely on uncirculated 
questions for classroom testing. 
Any additional distribution is in 
violation of the College Board’s 
copyright policies and may result 
in the termination of Practice Exam 
access for your school as well as the 
removal of access to other online 
services such as the AP Teacher 
Community and Online Score Reports. 
© 2019 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are 
registered trademarks of the College Board. Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents 
Exam Instructions 
Student Answer Sheet for the Multiple-Choice Section  
Section I: Multiple-Choice Questions 
Section II: Free-Response Questions 
Multiple-Choice Answer Key 
Course Framework Alignment and Rationales 
Free-Response Scoring Guidelines 
Scoring Worksheet 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data 
Note: This publication shows the page numbers that appeared in  
the 2018−19 AP Exam Instructions book and in the actual exam.  
This publication was not repaginated to begin with page 1. 
© 2019 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, SAT and the acorn logo are 
registered trademarks of the College Board. All other products and services may be trademarks of their 
respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: 
www.collegeboard.org/request-form. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Economics Exams 
76
AP Macroeconomics Exam
Regularly Scheduled Exam Date: Wednesday afternoon, May 15, 2019
Late-Testing Exam Date: Friday afternoon, May 24, 2019
AP Microeconomics Exam
Regularly Scheduled Exam Date: Friday morning, May 17, 2019
Late-Testing Exam Date: Wednesday morning, May 22, 2019
Section I
Total Time: 1 hour and 10 minutes
Calculator not permitted
Number of Questions: 60
(The number of questions may vary slightly depending on the form of the exam.)
Percent of Total Score: 66.67%
Writing Instrument: Pencil required
Section II
Total Time: 1 hour
(10-minute reading period, 50-minute writing period)
Calculator not permitted
Number of Questions: 3 required free-response questions
Percent of Total Score: 33.33%
Writing Instrument: Pen with black or dark blue ink
What Proctors Need to Bring to This Exam
 Exam packets
 Answer sheets
 AP Student Packs
 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual
 This book—2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
 AP Exam Seating Chart template
 School Code and Homeschool/Self-Study Codes
 Pencil sharpener
 Container for students’ electronic devices (if needed)
 Extra No. 2 pencils with erasers
 Extra pens with black or dark blue ink
 Lined paper
 Stapler
 Watch
 Signs for the door to the testing room
– “Exam in Progress”
– “Phones of any kind are prohibited during the
test administration, including breaks”


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Economics Exams 
AP Economics Exams  
77
Macroeconomics
Before Distributing Exams: Check that the title on exam covers is Macroeconomics, and
is printed in blue on the Section I exam booklet covers. (On any large-type exams, the 
exam title will be printed in black.) If there are any exam booklets with a different title, 
contact the AP coordinator immediately.
Microeconomics
Before Distributing Exams: Check that the title on all exam covers is Microeconomics,
and is printed in black. If there are any exam booklets with a different title, contact the 
AP coordinator immediately. 
SECTION I: Multiple Choice
›
Do not begin the exam instructions below until you have completed the
appropriate General Instructions for your group.
Make sure you begin the exam at the designated time. Remember, you must complete a 
seating chart for this exam. See pages 295–296 for a seating chart template and instructions. 
See the 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual for exam seating requirements (pages 56–59).
Macroeconomics
If you are giving the regularly scheduled exam, say:
It is Wednesday afternoon, May 15, and you will be taking the 
AP Macroeconomics Exam. Look at your exam packet and confirm that the exam 
title is “AP Macroeconomics” and is printed in blue on the Section I booklet 
cover. [For large-type exams: If you are taking a large-type exam, the exam title 
“AP Macroeconomics” is printed in black.] Raise your hand if your exam packet 
contains any title other than “AP Macroeconomics,” and I will help you.
If you are giving the alternate exam for late testing, say:
It is Friday afternoon, May 24, and you will be taking the AP Macroeconomics Exam. 
Look at your exam packet and confirm that the exam title is “AP Macroeconomics” 
and is printed in blue on the Section I booklet cover. [For large-type exams: If you 
are taking a large-type exam, the exam title “AP Macroeconomics” is printed 
in black.] Raise your hand if your exam packet contains any title other than “AP 
Macroeconomics,” and I will help you.
Microeconomics
If you are giving the regularly scheduled exam, say:
It is Friday morning, May 17, and you will be taking the AP Microeconomics Exam. 
Look at your exam packet and confirm that the exam title is “AP Microeconomics” 
and is printed in black. Raise your hand if your exam packet contains any title other 
than “AP Microeconomics,” and I will help you.
If you are giving the alternate exam for late testing, say:
It is Wednesday morning, May 22, and you will be taking the AP Microeconomics 
Exam. Look at your exam packet and confirm that the exam title is “AP 
Microeconomics” and is printed in black. Raise your hand if your exam packet 
contains any title other than “AP Microeconomics,” and I will help you.
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Economics Exams 
78
Once you confirm that all students have the correct exam, say:
In a moment, you will open the exam packet. By opening this packet, you 
agree to all of the AP Program’s policies and procedures outlined in the 
2018-19 Bulletin for AP Students and Parents.
You may now remove the shrinkwrap from the outside only of your exam 
packet. Do not open the Section I booklet; do not remove the shrinkwrap from 
the Section II materials. Put the white seals and the shrinkwrapped Section II 
booklet aside. . . .
Carefully remove the AP Exam label found near the top left of your exam 
booklet cover. Place it on page 1 of your answer sheet on the light blue box near 
the top right corner that reads “AP Exam Label.”
If students accidentally place the exam label in the space for the number label or vice 
versa, advise them to leave the labels in place. They should not try to remove the label; 
their exam can still be processed correctly. 
Listen carefully to all my instructions. I will give you time to complete each 
step. Please look up after completing each step. Raise your hand if you have 
any questions.
Give students enough time to complete each step. Don’t move on until all students are ready.
Read the statements on the front cover of the Section I booklet. . . .
Sign your name and write today’s date. . . .
Now print your full legal name where indicated. . . .
Turn to the back cover of your exam booklet and read it completely. . . .
Give students a few minutes to read the entire cover.
Are there any questions? . . .
You will now take the multiple-choice portion of the exam. You should have in 
front of you the multiple-choice booklet and your answer sheet. You may never 
discuss the multiple-choice exam content at any time in any form with anyone, 
including your teacher and other students. If you disclose the multiple-choice 
exam content through any means, your AP Exam score will be canceled.
Open your answer sheet to page 2. You must complete the answer sheet using a 
No. 2 pencil only. Mark all of your responses beginning on page 2 of your answer 
sheet, one response per question. Completely fill in the circles. If you need 
to erase, do so carefully and completely. No credit will be given for anything 
written in the exam booklet. Scratch paper is not allowed, but you may use the 
margins or any blank space in the exam booklet for scratch work. Calculators 
are not allowed on any part of this exam. Are there any questions? . . .
You have 1 hour and 10 minutes for this section. Open your Section I booklet 
and begin. 
Note Start Time 
 . Note Stop Time 
 .
Check that students are marking their answers in pencil on their answer sheets and that 
they have not opened their shrinkwrapped Section II booklets. 
After one hour, say: 
There are 10 minutes remaining.
After 10 minutes, say:
Stop working. Close your booklet and put your answer sheet on your desk, 
faceup. Make sure you have your AP number label and an AP Exam label on 
page 1 of your answer sheet. Sit quietly while I collect your answer sheets.
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Economics Exams 
AP Economics Exams  
79
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
Collect an answer sheet from each student. Check that each answer sheet has an 
AP number label and an AP Exam label. 
After all answer sheets have been collected, say:
Now you must seal your exam booklet using the white seals you set aside 
earlier. Remove the white seals from the backing and press one on each area of 
your exam booklet cover marked “PLACE SEAL HERE.” Fold each seal over the 
back cover. When you have finished, place the booklet on your desk, faceup. 
I will now collect your Section I booklet. . . . 
Collect a Section I booklet from each student. Check that each student has signed the front 
cover of the sealed Section I booklet.
There is a 10-minute break between Sections I and II. When all Section I materials 
have been collected and accounted for and you are ready for the break, say: 
Please listen carefully to these instructions before we take a 10-minute break. 
All items you placed under your chair at the beginning of this exam, including 
your Student Pack, must stay there, and you are not permitted to open or 
access them in any way. Leave your shrinkwrapped Section II packet on your 
desk during the break. You are not allowed to consult teachers, other students, 
notes, textbooks, or any other resources during the break. You may not make 
phone calls, send text messages, check email, use a social networking site, 
or access any electronic or communication device. You may not leave the 
designated break area. Remember, you may never discuss the multiple-choice 
exam content with anyone, and if you disclose the content through any means, 
your AP Exam score will be canceled. Are there any questions? . . . 
You may begin your break. Testing will resume at 
 .
SECTION II: Free Response
After the break, say: 
May I have everyone’s attention? Place your Student Pack on your desk. . . .
You may now remove the shrinkwrap from the Section II packet, but do not open 
the exam booklet until you are told to do so. . . . 
Read the bulleted statements on the front cover of the exam booklet. Look up 
when you have finished. . . . 
Now take an AP number label from your Student Pack and place it on the 
shaded box. If you don’t have any AP number labels, write your AP number in the 
box. Look up when you have finished. . . .
Read the last statement. . . . 
Using your pen, print the first, middle, and last initials of your legal name in the 
boxes and print today’s date where indicated. This constitutes your signature and 
your agreement to the statements on the front cover. . . .
Now turn to the back cover. Using your pen, complete Items 1 through 3 under 
“Important Identification Information.”. . .
Read Item 4. . . . 
Are there any questions? . . .
If this is your last AP Exam, you may keep your Student Pack. Place it under your 
chair for now. Otherwise if you are taking any other AP Exams this year, leave 
your Student Pack on your desk and I will collect it now. . . . 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Economics Exams 
80
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
Read the information on the back cover of the exam booklet. Do not open the 
booklet until you are told to do so. Look up when you have finished. . . . 
Collect the Student Packs from students who are taking any other AP Exams this year. 
Then say:
Are there any questions? . . . 
The total Section II time is one hour. This includes a 10-minute reading period. 
The reading period is designed to provide you with time to develop thoughtful, 
well-organized responses. You are advised to take advantage of the reading 
period to plan what you will write. You may begin writing your exam responses 
before the reading period is over. You may make notes on page 3 and the pages 
that contain the exam questions, but your responses must be written on the 
designated lined pages. Are there any questions? . . .
You are responsible for pacing yourself and may proceed freely from one 
question to the next. You must write your answers in the Section II booklet 
using a pen with black or dark blue ink. You are not permitted to use other 
colored pens or pencils to draw graphs or diagrams. If you need more paper 
to complete your responses, raise your hand. At the top of each extra sheet of 
paper you use, write only: 
 your AP number,
 the exam title, and
 the question number you are working on.
Do not write your name. 
Make sure to begin your response on the lined page directly following the first 
appearance of the question and continue your response on the additional lined 
pages that follow. Remember to write your answers on the lined pages provided 
for each question; only responses written on the lined pages will be scored.
You may now open the Section II booklet and begin the 10-minute 
reading period. 
Note Start Time 
 . Note Stop Time 
 .
After 10 minutes, say: 
The reading period is over. You have 50 minutes remaining to complete Section II.
Note Start Time 
 . Note Stop Time 
 .
Check that students are using pens and that they are writing their answers in their 
exam booklets. 
After 40 minutes, say: 
There are 10 minutes remaining. 
After 10 minutes, say: 
Stop working and close your exam booklet. Place it on your desk, faceup. . . . 
If any students used extra paper for a question in the free-response section, have those 
students staple the extra sheet(s) to the first page corresponding to that question in their 
free-response exam booklets. Complete an Incident Report after the exam and return 
these free-response booklets with the extra sheets attached in the Incident Report return 
envelope (see page 68 of the 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual for complete details).
Then say:
Remain in your seat, without talking, while the exam materials are collected. . . . 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Economics Exams 
AP Economics Exams  
81
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
Collect a Section II booklet from each student. Check for the following:
 Exam booklet front cover: The student placed an AP number label on the shaded box
and printed their initials and today’s date.
 Exam booklet back cover: The student completed the “Important Identification
Information” area.
When all exam materials have been collected and accounted for, return to students any 
electronic devices you may have collected before the start of the exam. 
If you are giving the regularly scheduled exam, say:
You may not discuss or share the free-response exam content with anyone 
unless it is released on the College Board website in about two days. Your 
AP Exam score results will be available online in July.
If you are giving the alternate exam for late testing, say:
None of the content in this exam may ever be discussed or shared in any way at 
any time. Your AP Exam score results will be available online in July.
If any students completed the AP number card at the beginning of this exam, say:
Please remember to take your AP number card with you. You will need the 
information on this card to view your scores and order AP score reporting 
services online.
Then say:
You are now dismissed.
After-Exam Tasks
Be sure to give the completed seating chart to the AP coordinator. Schools must retain 
seating charts for at least six months (unless the state or district requires that they be 
retained for a longer period of time). Schools should not return any seating charts in their 
exam shipments unless they are required as part of an Incident Report.
NOTE: If you administered exams to students with accommodations, review the 2018-19 AP 
Coordinator’s Manual and the 2018-19 AP SSD Guidelines for information about completing 
the Nonstandard Administration Report (NAR) form, and returning these exams.
The exam proctor should complete the following tasks if asked to do so by the 
AP coordinator. Otherwise, the AP coordinator must complete these tasks:
 Complete an Incident Report for any students who used extra paper for the free-response
section. (Incident Report forms are provided in the coordinator packets sent with
the exam shipments.) These forms must be completed with a No. 2 pencil. It is
best to complete a single Incident Report for multiple students per exam subject, per
administration (regular or late testing), as long as all required information is provided.
Include all exam booklets with extra sheets of paper in an Incident Report return
envelope (see page 68 of the 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual for complete details).
 Return all exam materials to secure storage until they are shipped back to the
AP Program. (See page 27 of the 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual for more information
about secure storage.) Before storing materials, check the “School Use Only” section on
page 1 of the answer sheet and:
 Fill in the appropriate section number circle in order to access a separate 
AP Instructional Planning Report (for regularly scheduled exams only) or subject 
score roster at the class section or teacher level. See “Post-Exam Activities” in the 
2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual.
 

 Check your list of students who are eligible for fee reductions and fill in the 
appropriate circle on their registration answer sheets.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Name:____________________________________ 
Answer Sheet for AP Microeconomics 
Practice Exam, Section I 
No. 
Answer 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
No. 
Answer 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Microeconomics Exam 
2019 
SECTION I: Multiple Choice 
DO NOT OPEN THIS BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
At a Glance 
Total Time 
1 hour and 10 minutes 
Number of Questions 
60 
Percent of Total Score 
66.67% 
Writing Instrument 
Pencil required 
Electronic Device 
None allowed 
Instructions 
Section I of this exam contains 60 multiple-choice questions. Fill in only the circles for 
numbers 1 through 60 on your answer sheet. 
Indicate all of your answers to the multiple-choice questions on the answer sheet. No 
credit will be given for anything written in this exam booklet, but you may use the booklet 
for notes or scratch work. After you have decided which of the suggested answers is best, 
completely fill in the corresponding circle on the answer sheet. Give only one answer to 
each question. If you change an answer, be sure that the previous mark is erased 
completely. Here is a sample question and answer. sample question and sample answer
Use your time effectively, working as quickly as you can without losing accuracy. Do not 
spend too much time on any one question. Go on to other questions and come back to 
the ones you have not answered if you have time. It is not expected that everyone will 
know the answers to all of the multiple-choice questions. 
Your total score on the multiple-choice section is based only on the number of questions 
answered correctly. Points are not deducted for incorrect answers or unanswered 
questions. 
Form I 
Form Code 4PBP4-S 
34 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
The inclusion of source material in this exam is not intended as an 
endorsement by the College Board or ETS of the content, ideas, or 
values expressed in the material. The material has been selected by 
the economics faculty who serve on the AP Microeconomics 
Development Committee. In their judgment, the material printed 
here reflects various aspects of the course of study on which this 
exam is based and is therefore appropriate to use to measure the 
skills and knowledge of this course. 
-2- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MICROECONOMICS 
Section I 
Time—1 hour and 10 minutes 
60 Questions 
Directions:  Each of the questions or incomplete statements below is followed by five suggested answers or 
completions. Select the one that is best in each case and then fill in the corresponding circle on the answer sheet. 
 1. Which of the following is a defining characteristic 
of a market economy? 
(A) Private ownership of resources 
(B) Equitable distribution of income 
(C) Taxation of personal income 
(D) Reliance on public goods  
(E) Government-guided resource allocation 
Good X (units)
Good Y (units) 
0
100
20
95
40
85
60
65
80
35
100
0
 2. The table above shows the maximum possible 
output combinations of good X and good Y that 
Microland can produce by using all of its 
available resources and technology. As the 
production of good X increases, what happens to 
the opportunity cost of producing good X? 
(A) It decreases, because the production of  
good Y decreases by greater amounts. 
(B) It decreases, because the production of  
good Y increases by smaller amounts. 
(C) It remains constant, because the production 
of good X increases by the same amount. 
(D) It increases, because the production of  
good Y decreases by greater amounts.  
(E) It increases, because the production of  
good Y increases by smaller amounts.  
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-3- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 3. An increase in the supply of good X resulted in  
an increase in the price and quantity of good Y.  
It can be concluded that good Y is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(A) an inferior good 
(B) a luxury good 
(C) a normal good 
(D) a substitute for good X 
(E) a complement for good X 
 4. Which of the following will shift the supply curve 
for apples to the right? 
(A) An increase in consumers’ income 
(B) An increase in the price of apples 
(C) An increase in the wages of apple pickers 
(D) A decrease in the rental price for apple 
harvesting equipment 
(E) A decrease in the demand for oranges, a 
substitute in consumption 
 5. Which of the following relationships among the 
price elasticity of demand, change in price, and 
change in total revenue is consistent? 
Price Elasticity 
of Demand 
Change 
in Price 
Change in  
Total Revenue 
(A) Elastic 
Increase 
Increase 
(B) Elastic 
Decrease 
Decrease 
(C) Unit Elastic 
Decrease 
Decrease 
(D) Inelastic 
Decrease 
Increase 
(E) Inelastic 
Decrease 
Decrease 
 6. Which of the following best describes how  
a consumer maximizes total utility from the 
consumption of a bundle of goods and services? 
(A) By choosing the quantity of each good such 
that the quantity demanded of each good is 
equal to the quantity supplied 
(B) By choosing the quantity of each good such 
that the marginal utility from each good is 
equal to zero 
(C) By choosing the quantity of each good such 
that the price is equal to the marginal 
revenue 
(D) By choosing the level of output where 
marginal revenue is equal to marginal cost 
(E) By choosing the combination of goods such 
that the marginal utility per dollar spent on 
the last unit of each good is equal 
 7. The marginal benefit of consuming a good is 
(A) the change in average utility that results from 
consuming one more unit of the good 
(B) the same as the total benefit 
(C) equal to the marginal cost of the good 
(D) the change in total expenditures as a result of 
buying one more unit of the good 
(E) the maximum amount a consumer is willing 
to pay for one more unit of the good 
 8. The economic concept of total consumer surplus 
refers to which of the following? 
(A) The difference between the quantity of  
a good or service that people purchase and 
the amount that they actually consume 
(B) The overproduction of goods and services 
relative to the socially optimal level of 
output 
(C) The sum of the differences between the prices 
that consumers are willing to pay for a good 
or service and the price they actually pay 
(D) The sum of the differences between the prices 
that consumers are willing to pay for a good 
or service and the minimum prices that 
sellers must receive to offer that quantity 
(E) The difference between the quantity 
demanded and the quantity supplied  
of a product at a given price 
 9. The table below is partially filled in with the 
different types of costs for a firm. Based on the 
information in the table, what is the marginal cost 
of producing the second unit? 
Quantity Variable 
Cost 
Fixed 
Cost 
Total 
Cost 
Average 
Total  
Cost 
0
$0
$60
1
$130
2
$90
(A)  $50 
(B)  $60 
(C)  $70 
(D)  $90 
(E) $180 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-4- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
The figure presents three curves on a graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane, with the origin labeled 0. The horizontal axis is slightly longer than the vertical axis. The horizontal axis is labeled Quantity. The following four quantities are indicated on the horizontal axis, from left to right: Q sub 1, Q sub 2, Q sub 3, Q sub 4. Quantity Q sub 1 is located about one sixth of the way along the horizontal axis. The distance from Q sub 2 to Q sub 1 is about twice the distance from Q sub 1 to the origin. The distance from Q sub 3 to Q sub 2 is about the same as the distance from Q sub 1 to the origin. The distance from Q sub 4 to Q sub 3 is slightly greater than the distance from Q sub 1 to the origin. Vertical grid lines emanate upward from each quantity on the horizontal axis. The vertical axis represents price, in U S dollars. The following three prices are indicated on the vertical axis, from bottom to top: P sub 1, P sub 2, P sub 3. Price P sub 1 is located a little more than one third of the way up the vertical axis. Price P sub 2 is located slightly above P sub 1. Price P sub 3 is located about five sixths of the way up the vertical axis. Horizontal grid lines emanate to the right from each price on the vertical axis. The three curves on the graph are labeled Demand, Average Total Cost, and Marginal Cost. The Demand curve begins on the vertical axis at price P sub 3, and moves horizontally and to the right, parallel to the horizontal axis. The Average Total Cost curve begins slightly above price P sub 3, and slightly to the left of quantity Q sub 1. It moves downward and to the right, and intersects the Demand curve at the coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 3. It continues to move downward and to the right, and reaches a minimum at the point with coordinates Q sub 2 comma P sub 1. It then turns to move upward and to the right, passes through the point with coordinates Q sub 3 comma P sub 2, and intersects the Demand curve a second time at the coordinates Q sub 4 comma P sub 3. The Average Total Cost curve ends to the right of quantity Q sub 4, and above price P sub 3, slightly above the height it began. The Marginal Cost curve begins below price P sub 1, and slightly to the right of quantity Q sub 1. It moves upward and to the right, slowly at first and then more steeply, and intersects the Average Total Cost curve at the coordinates Q sub 2 comma P sub 1. It continues to steeply move upward and to the right, and intersects the Demand curve at the coordinates Q sub 3 comma P sub 3. The Marginal Cost curve ends just to the right of Q sub 3, and above price P sub 3.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10. How many units of output should a firm with the  
cost and demand curves shown above produce to  
maximize profit?  
(A) 0 
(B) 
 
Q sub 1 
(C) 
 
Q sub 2 
(D) 
 
Q sub 3 
(E) 
 
Q sub 4 
11. Currently,  X Y Z Corporation can produce 50 units 
of output using 20 workers and 8 units of capital. 
Which of the following changes in the number of 
workers, units of capital, and quantity of output 
are consistent with constant returns to scale?  
Workers 
Capital 
Output 
(A)  
40 
8 
100 
(B)  
40 
16 
90 
(C)  
20 
4 
25 
(D)  
10 
4 
25 
(E)  
10 
8 
25 
12. If the four largest firms in a market produce  
88 percent of total industry output, the market is  
(A) perfectly competitive 
(B) a pure monopoly 
(C) a natural monopoly 
(D) an oligopoly 
(E) a monopsony 
13. In monopolistic competition, an individual firm’s 
market power stems from which of the following? 
(A) Economies of scale in production 
(B) The production of a differentiated product 
(C) The absence of perfectly competitive firms 
that produce similar products 
(D) Barriers to entry allowing firms to earn 
economic profit 
(E) The maintenance of excess capacity to meet 
unexpected increase in demand 
14. A profit-maximizing firm hires labor in a 
perfectly competitive market. Labor is the only 
variable input, and the marginal product of the 
last worker hired is 10 units per hour. If the 
hourly wage is $20, the firm’s marginal revenue  
(A) is $2 
(B) is $20 
(C) increases as more output is produced 
(D) increases first and then decreases as more 
output is produced 
(E) decreases first and then increases as more 
output is produced 
15. Assume the demand curve for a good is  
perfectly inelastic and the production of  
each unit of this good generates external costs.  
A profit-maximizing firm producing the good  
in an unregulated free market will 
(A) generate deadweight loss because marginal 
social cost is greater than marginal  
private cost. 
(B) generate deadweight loss only if marginal 
costs are constant 
(C) not generate deadweight loss because the 
equilibrium quantity is socially optimal 
(D) not generate deadweight loss unless marginal 
costs are constant 
(E) not generate deadweight loss unless fixed 
costs are zero 
16. A linear production possibilities curve indicates 
which of the following? 
(A) Constant opportunity costs 
(B) Decreasing opportunity costs 
(C) Increasing opportunity costs 
(D) Diminishing marginal returns 
(E) Labor-intensive production 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-5- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
The figure presents a graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled Quantity, in units, and the numbers 0 through 400, in increments of 100, are indicated. Vertical grid lines emanate upward from the values 100 and 200 on the horizontal axis. The vertical axis is labeled Price, in U S dollars, and the numbers 2 through 12, in increments of 2, are indicated. Horizontal grid lines emanate to the right from the values 4, 6, and 8 on the vertical axis. The graph has two curves that are labeled Demand and Supply. The Demand curve begins at 10 on the vertical axis, and moves downward and to the right in a straight line. It passes through the points with coordinates 100 comma 8 and 200 comma 6, and ends approximately at the coordinates 400 comma 2. The Supply curve begins at 2 on the vertical axis, and moves upward and to the right in a straight line. It passes through the point with coordinates 100 comma 4, intersects the Demand curve at the coordinates 200 comma 6, and ends approximately at the coordinates 400 comma 10. There are three unlabeled points indicated on the graph. The first point is located on the Demand curve at the coordinates 100 comma 8. The second point is located on the Supply curve at the coordinates 100 comma 4. The third point in located at the intersection of the Demand and Supply curves at the coordinates 200 comma 6.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17. Assume that the government imposes a  
$4 per-unit tax on sellers of a good in the  
market described by the graph above. What  
are the price paid by buyers, the after-tax price 
received by sellers, and the deadweight loss? 
Price Paid 
by Buyers 
Price Received 
by Sellers 
Deadweight 
Loss 
(A) 
$8 
$6 
$100 
(B) 
$8 
$4 
$200 
(C) 
$6 
$6 
$0 
(D) 
$4 
$8 
$100 
(E) 
$4 
$8 
$200 
18. Which of the following must be true if at the 
tenth unit of output, marginal cost ( M C ) is  
$130 and average total cost ( A T C ) is $150 ? 
(A)  A T C of producing the ninth unit is higher 
than $150. 
(B)  A T C of producing the ninth unit is less  
than $150. 
(C)  M C of producing the ninth unit is higher  
than $130. 
(D) Average variable cost of producing the tenth 
unit is higher than $150. 
(E) Average variable cost of producing the tenth 
unit is equal to $20. 
19. Which of the following occurs as a result of the 
substitution effect of an increase in the price of a 
normal good? 
(A) The demand for the good decreases. 
(B) The demand for the complementary good 
increases. 
(C) The demand for the good becomes more 
elastic. 
(D) The quantity demanded of the substitute good 
decreases. 
(E) The quantity demanded of the good 
decreases. 
Number of 
Workers 
Quantity of 
Output 
0 
0 
1 
10 
2 
25 
3 
35 
4 
40 
5 
42 
20. Given the production schedule above, what is the 
maximum number of workers the firm can hire 
before the effects of diminishing marginal returns 
set in? 
(A) 1 
(B) 2 
(C) 3 
(D) 4 
(E) 5 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-6- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
T
he figure presents the graph of four curves in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane, with the origin labeled 0. The horizontal axis is labeled Quantity, and the values Q sub 1, Q sub 2, and Q sub 3 are indicated from left to right. Quantity Q sub 1 is located about one fourth of the way along the horizontal axis. Quantity Q sub 2 is located slightly to the right of quantity Q sub 2. The distance from Q sub 2 to Q sub 3 is about three times the distance from Q sub 1 to Q sub 2. Vertical grid lines extend upward from each value on the horizontal axis. The vertical axis represents price, in U S dollars, and the following values are indicated from bottom to top: P sub 1, P sub 2, P sub 3, P sub 4. Price P sub 1 is located about one third of the way up the vertical axis. Price P sub 2 is located a little bit above price P sub 1. The distance from P sub 2 to P sub 3 is slightly longer than the distance from P sub 1 to P sub 2. The distance from P sub 3 to P sub 4 is slightly shorter than the distance from P sub 1 to P sub 2. Horizontal grid lines extend to the right from each value on the vertical axis. The four curves are labeled Demand, Marginal Revenue, Average Total Cost, and Marginal Cost. The Demand curve begins on the vertical axis and high above price P sub 4, and moves downward and to the right in a straight line. It passes through the points with coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 4, Q sub 2 comma P sub 3, and Q sub 3 comma P sub 1. It ends above the horizontal axis, and to the right of quantity Q sub 3. The Marginal Revenue curve begins where the Demand curve begins on the vertical axis, and moves downward and to the right in a straight line. It passes through the point with coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 1, and ends slightly below the horizontal axis, and slightly to the right of quantity Q sub 2. The Average Total Cost curve begins just above price P sub 3, and in between the vertical axis and the Marginal Revenue curve, and slowly moves downward and to the right. It intersects the Marginal Revenue curve just above price P sub 2, and reaches a minimum at the point with coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 2. It then turns to move upward and to the right, slowly at first and then more steeply, and intersects the Demand curve slightly above the price P sub 2, and in between quantities Q sub 2 and Q sub 3. It ends just above price P sub 3, and just to the left of quantity Q sub 3. The Marginal Cost curve begins slightly to the right of the vertical axis, and just below price P sub 1, and steeply moves downward and to the right. It then turns to steeply move upward, intersects the Marginal Revenue curve at the coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 1, intersects the Average Total Cost curve almost at price P sub 2, and intersects the Demand curve at the coordinates Q sub 2 comma P sub 3. It ends near the top of the graph, and slightly to the left of quantity Q sub 3. On the graph, there are six points that are labeled the following: I, J, K, L, M, N. Point I is located at the coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 4, and lies on the Demand curve. Point J is located at the coordinates Q sub 2 comma P sub 3, and lies on the intersection of the Demand and Marginal Cost curves. Point K is located in between quantities Q sub 2 and Q sub 3, just above price P sub 2, and lies on the intersection of the Demand and Average Total Cost curves. Point L is located at the coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 1, and lies on the intersection of the Marginal Revenue and Marginal Cost curves. Point M is located at the coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 2, and lies on the Average Total Cost curve. Point N is located at the coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 3.
 
 
 
 
 
21. Which of the following combinations of output, 
price, and economic profit is consistent for the 
profit-maximizing monopolist depicted in the 
graph above? 
Output 
Price 
Economic Profit 
(A) 
 
Q sub 1 
 
P sub 1 
0 
P sub 1
, end sub, L Q sub 1, end sub
(B) 
 
 Q sub 1 
 P sub 4 
P
 sub 1, end sub, P sub 4, end sub, I L
(C) 
 
Q sub 1 
 
P sub 4 
P
 s u
b
 
2, end sub, P sub 4, end sub, I M
(D) 
 
Q sub 2 
 
P sub 3 
P
 s ub  
2
,
 end sub, P sub 3, end sub, N M
(E) 
 
Q sub 3 
 
P sub 1 
P
 s ub  
1
,
 end sub, P sub 2, end sub, M L
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Town Herald 
Do Not 
Change 
Subscription 
Price 
Increase 
Subscription 
Price 
Daily 
Voice
Do Not 
Change 
Subscription 
Price 
$500, $400 
$200, $700 
Increase 
Subscription 
Price 
$600, $300 
$300, $100 
22. The two major newspapers in a city, Daily Voice 
and Town Herald, are considering whether to 
raise the subscription price. The first entries in the 
matrix above show the profits to Daily Voice, and 
the second entries show the profits to Town 
Herald. Which of the following is consistent with 
the above payoff matrix? 
(A) Do Not Change Subscription Price is a 
dominant strategy for Daily Voice. 
(B) Do Not Change Subscription Price is a 
dominant strategy for Town Herald. 
(C) Increase Subscription Price is a dominant 
strategy for Daily Voice. 
(D) Increase Subscription Price is a dominant 
strategy for Town Herald. 
(E) There are no dominant strategies in the above 
payoff matrix. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-7- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23. If a firm engages in perfect price discrimination, it 
charges 
(A) each customer the highest price the customer 
is willing to pay 
(B) each customer the average cost of the product 
(C) each customer the lowest price the customer 
is willing to pay 
(D) different prices to customers based on how 
old they are 
(E) different prices to customers based on how 
many units of output they buy 
24. Assume a perfectly competitive firm is currently 
producing 100 units of output. Its marginal cost  
is $6 and rising at that output quantity. Its average 
variable cost is $7 and its average fixed cost is $3. 
If the product’s price is $6, which of the following 
will the firm do in the short run to maximize its 
profit? 
(A) Shut down 
(B) Produce, but less than 100 units of output 
(C) Produce more than 100 units of output 
(D) Continue to produce at exactly 100 units  
of output 
(E) Increase its price above $6 
Questions 25-26 refer to the data in the table 
below. 
A perfectly competitive firm operates with a fixed 
amount of capital that costs $1,000 per day. Labor is 
the only variable input. The firm hires labor in a 
perfectly competitive labor market at $100 per day 
per worker. The table below shows the firm’s 
production function.  
Number of 
Workers Hired 
Quantity of 
Output (units) 
0 
0 
1
10
2
30
3
54
4
75
5
85
6
90
25. What is the marginal product of the third worker? 
(A)  5 
(B) 10 
(C) 20 
(D) 24 
(E) It cannot be determined from the  
information given.  
26. The firm will maximize profit in the short run if it  
(A) shuts down and the price is $10 
(B) produces 30 units and the price is $4 
(C) produces 30 units and the price is $10 
(D) produces 54 units and the price is $4 
(E) produces 85 units and the price is $10 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-8- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hours of 
Labor 
Marginal 
Product 
0
0
1
10
2
12
3
9
4
7
5
4
27. The table above shows how a firm’s hourly level 
of output changes as more of the labor input is 
employed. The firm sells its output and hires labor 
in perfectly competitive markets. The wage paid 
to labor is $10 per hour, and the price of the 
firm’s output is $2 per unit. Based on the data in 
the table, the marginal revenue product of the 
fourth hour of labor is equal to 
(A)  $4 
(B)  $7 
(C) $14 
(D) $26 
(E) $70 
Levels of 
Cleanup 
Total Cost of 
Cleanup ($) 
Total Benefit 
of Cleanup ($) 
0
0
0
1
7
45
2
37
80
3
92
105
4
172
125
5
272
140
28. The table above shows the total cost and the total 
benefit of cleaning up pollution in a community. 
Which of the following cleanup levels is socially 
optimal? 
(A) 1 
(B) 2 
(C) 3 
(D) 4 
(E) 5 
29. The Lorenz curve represents the relationship 
between  
(A) the cumulative percentage of households  
and the cumulative percentage of income 
(B)  income tax rates and income tax revenues 
(C) child labor rates and the poverty levels 
(D) income inequality and education level 
(E) market structure and the number of firms  
in the market 
30. Antitrust laws are designed to maintain a 
competitive market environment by 
(A) eliminating monopolies wherever they exist 
(B) preventing monopolies from generating 
negative externalities 
(C) limiting practices that increase a firm’s  
market power  
(D) imposing price ceilings on products produced 
by monopolies 
(E) making charging a price above marginal cost 
illegal 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-9- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
Country 
Opportunity Cost 
of 1 Ton of 
Apples 
Opportunity Cost 
of 1 Ton of 
Oranges 
X 
1 ton of oranges 
1 ton of apples 
Y 
2 tons of oranges 
0.5 ton of apples 
31. The table above shows the opportunity costs of  
producing apples and oranges in Countries X  
and Y. Which of the following can be concluded 
based on the data given in the table? 
(A) Country Y has an absolute advantage  
in producing both goods. 
(B) Country Y has a comparative advantage  
in producing both goods. 
(C) Country X has an absolute advantage  
in producing both goods. 
(D) Country X has a comparative advantage  
in producing oranges. 
(E) Country X has a comparative advantage  
in producing apples. 
32. If the price elasticity of supply for pickles is 2 and 
the price of pickles increases by 10 percent, then 
the quantity supplied of pickles will increase by  
(A)  0.2% 
(B)  5% 
(C)  8% 
(D) 12% 
(E) 20% 
33. If a 10 percent increase in the price of good X 
results in a 20 percent decrease in the quantity of 
good Y demanded, which of the following is true? 
(A) Good X and good Y are complementary 
goods, and the cross-price elasticity is  negative 0.5. 
(B) Good X and good Y are substitute goods, and 
the income elasticity is  positive 2 . 
(C) Good X and good Y are complementary 
goods, and the cross-price elasticity is  negative 2 . 
(D) Good X and good Y are normal goods, and 
the income elasticity is  positive 2 . 
(E) Good X and good Y are substitute goods, and 
the cross-price elasticity is  negative 2 . 
34. Which of the following provides a possible 
explanation for a simultaneous increase in the 
equilibrium price and the quantity of blueberries 
in a market? 
(A) An increase in the price of strawberries, a 
substitute 
(B) An increase in the supply of strawberries, a 
substitute 
(C) An increase in the price of farmland used to 
grow blueberries 
(D) A decrease in the price of blueberry 
harvesting equipment 
(E) Imposition of a price floor in the market for 
blueberries 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-10- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35. The table below shows the per-unit prices and 
marginal utility for the last unit of video games 
and comic books that Kyle purchased. 
 
Video 
Games 
Comic 
Books 
Price per unit 
$25 
$10 
Marginal utility 
50 
50 
Kyle spent all of his allocated budget on  
video games and comic books. To maximize  
his utility, Kyle should have purchased 
(A) more video games and fewer comic books 
(B) fewer video games and more comic books 
(C) fewer of both goods 
(D) equal amounts of both goods 
(E) more of both goods 
36. A perfectly competitive firm currently produces 
1,000 units of output and hires its resources in  
a perfectly competitive factor market. It uses  
both labor and capital as inputs. The price of  
labor is $40; the price of capital is $100. The 
marginal product of labor is 8 units, and the 
marginal product of capital is 10 units. Which  
of the following must be true? 
(A) The firm is currently maximizing its profit. 
(B) The firm can produce more than 1,000 units 
without increasing the total cost if it uses 
more labor and less capital. 
(C) The firm can produce more than 1,000 units 
without increasing the total cost if it uses 
more capital and less labor. 
(D) The firm can reduce the cost of producing 
1,000 units by using less capital and 
employing the same amount of labor. 
(E) The firm can reduce the cost of producing 
1,000 units by employing less labor and 
using the same amount of capital. 
37. When two firms interact in an oligopolistic 
market, which of the following statements is true? 
(A) If one firm has a dominant strategy, then  
the other firm does not have a dominant 
strategy. 
(B) If one firm has a dominant strategy, then the 
other firm also has a dominant strategy. 
(C) Both firms must have dominant strategies. 
(D) If one firm has a dominant strategy, then 
there is no Nash equilibrium. 
(E) If both firms have dominant strategies, then 
there is a Nash equilibrium. 
38. Which of the following is true when a  
profit-maximizing monopolist produces in  
the elastic portion of its demand curve? 
(A) It can increase total revenue by raising price. 
(B) It can decrease average total cost by  
reducing output. 
(C) Price is equal to marginal revenue. 
(D) Marginal revenue is less than  
marginal cost. 
(E) Marginal revenue is positive. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-11- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Questions 39-40 refer to the cost and revenue 
conditions of a monopolistically competitive firm 
shown in the graph below.  M C equals marginal cost , 
 A T C equals average total cost ,  A V C equals average variable cost 
cost, and  M R equals marginal revenue . 
The figure presents a graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled Quantity, and the values Q sub 1, Q sub 2, and Q sub 3 are indicated from left to right, with vertical grid lines that extend upward from each value. The vertical axis represents price, in U S dollars, and the following values are indicated from bottom to top: P sub 1, P sub 2, P sub 3, P sub 4, P sub 5. Horizontal grid lines extend to the right from each value on the vertical axis. The graph has five curves that are labeled Demand, M R, M C, A V C, and A T C. The Demand curve begins at price P sub 5 on the vertical axis, and moves downward and to the right in a straight line. It passes through the points with coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 3 and Q sub 2 comma P sub 2, and it ends far to the right of quantity Q sub 3, and below price P sub 1. The M R curve begins where the Demand curve begins on the vertical axis, and moves downward and to the right in a straight line. It passes through the point with coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 1, and ends in between quantities Q sub 1 and Q sub 2, and far below the horizontal axis. The M C curve begins to the left of quantity Q sub 1, and slightly above the horizontal axis, and moves upward and to the right in a straight line. It intersects the M R curve at coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 1, intersects the Demand curve at coordinates Q sub 2 comma P sub 2, and passes through the point with coordinates Q sub 3 comma P sub 3. It ends far to the right of quantity Q sub 3, and in between prices P sub 4 and P sub 5. The A V C curve begins slightly to the right of the vertical axis, and at price P sub 5, and steeply moves downward and to the right. It intersects the M C curve in between quantities Q sub 2 and Q sub 3, then turns to move upward and to the right, and ends far to the right of quantity Q sub 3, in between prices P sub 3 and P sub 4. The A T C curve begins slightly to the left of quantity Q sub 1, and just above price P sub 5, and steeply moves downward and to the right. It passes through the point with coordinates Q sub 1 comma P sub 4, and intersects the M C curve at the coordinates Q sub 3 comma P sub 3. It then turns to move upward and to the right, and ends far to the right of quantity Q sub 3, just above the A V C curve.
39. The firm’s profit-maximizing output in the  
short run is 
(A) zero, because P is less than A V C
(B)  Q sub 1 because M R equals M C
(C)  Q sub 3, because P equals M C 
(D)  Q sub 3, because M C equals A T C
(E) impossible to determine 
40. Which of the following will the firm do in the 
long run if market conditions do not change? 
(A) It will increase output to  Q sub 2  and lower price 
to  P sub 2  to minimize losses. 
(B) It will increase output to  Q sub 3  and raise price  
to  P sub 4 to earn zero economic profit. 
(C) It will produce  Q sub 1  and set price equal to 
marginal revenue. 
(D) It will exit the industry. 
(E) It will build a larger plant to achieve 
decreasing returns to scale. 
41. At the current quantity that a firm is selling, the 
firm has marginal revenue of $750 and marginal 
cost of $800. Which of the following is true? 
(A) The firm is maximizing profit. 
(B) The firm’s profits would increase if the firm 
increased the quantity sold. 
(C) The firm’s profits would increase if the firm 
decreased the quantity sold. 
(D) The firm earns negative economic profit. 
(E) The firm earns zero accounting profit. 
42. Which of the following is true of a monopsony in 
a labor market? 
(A) It faces a labor supply curve that is horizontal 
at the competitive market equilibrium wage. 
(B) Its marginal factor (resource) cost is the same 
as the market supply curve. 
(C) At its optimal level of employment, it pays  
a wage rate higher than the competitive 
market wage rate. 
(D) The imposition of a minimum wage results in 
a larger reduction in employment than is 
true in a competitive market. 
(E) Its marginal factor (resource) cost curve lies 
above the labor supply curve because hiring 
an extra worker means paying more to 
existing workers. 
43. Which of the following indicates that a perfectly 
competitive firm has hired the profit-maximizing 
amount of labor? 
(A) The total product of labor exceeds the total 
real wage payments to workers. 
(B) The average product of labor exceeds the real 
wage paid to workers. 
(C) The marginal revenue product of labor is 
below the wage paid to workers. 
(D) The marginal revenue product of labor is 
above the wage paid to workers. 
(E) The marginal revenue product of labor equals 
the wage paid to workers. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-12- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
44. In a competitive market in which the production 
of a good causes pollution, the socially optimal 
output is different from the competitive market 
equilibrium output of that good because the 
(A) marginal social benefit is higher than the 
marginal social cost 
(B) marginal social benefit is lower than the 
marginal private cost 
(C) marginal social cost is higher than the 
marginal private cost 
(D) marginal social benefit is higher than the 
marginal private benefit 
(E) total social cost is less than the total social 
benefit 
45. Which of the following explains why free-riding 
can result in a market failure? 
(A) More than the socially optimal quantity is 
produced and consumed. 
(B) The socially optimal quantity is produced but 
less than the socially optimal quantity is 
consumed. 
(C) Private producers of nonexcludable goods are 
unable to charge everyone who consumes 
the good. 
(D) There is a market surplus of the good. 
(E) There is no consumer surplus derived from 
the good. 
46. Individual private property rights provide people 
incentives to 
(A) meet societal goals rather than pursue their 
own self-interest 
(B) produce goods and services regardless of 
market demand 
(C) achieve equitable distribution of goods and 
services through competitive markets 
(D) focus only on benefits without regard to costs 
(E) produce goods and services that are valued in 
markets 
47. Assume the market for disposable coffee cups  
is in equilibrium and disposable coffee cups  
are inputs for serving brewed coffee. Which of  
the following will result in a higher short-run 
equilibrium price of disposable coffee cups? 
(A) A decrease in the supply of coffee 
(B) A decrease in the number of locations serving 
brewed coffee 
(C) An increase in the supply of disposable 
coffee cups 
(D) An increase in the demand for brewed coffee 
(E) An increase in the price of tea, a complement 
for coffee 
48. The equilibrium price for a good with a vertical 
supply curve and a downward-sloping demand 
curve is $20. If a binding price floor is set, which 
of the following will occur? 
(A) There will be a shortage of the good. 
(B) The sum of consumer and producer surpluses 
will decrease. 
(C) The equilibrium price of the good will 
decrease. 
(D) The quantity sold of the good will remain 
unchanged. 
(E) Demand for substitutes for the good will 
decrease. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-13- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
T
he fi
gure presents a set of two graphs. The first graph presents a line in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane, which is titled Adey. The horizontal axis is labeled Quantity, and the numbers 0 through 9, in increments of 1, are indicated. The vertical axis is labeled Price, and the numbers 0 through 18, in increments of 2, are indicated. The following 9 data points are indicated along the line. Point 1. 0 comma 16. Point 2. 1 comma 14. Point 3. 2 comma 12. Point 4. 3 comma 10. Point 5. 4 comma 8. Point 6. 5 comma 6. Point 7. 6 comma 4. Point 8. 7 comma 2. Point 9. 8 comma 0. The second graph presents a line in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane, which is titled Sarah. The horizontal axis is labeled Quantity, and the numbers 0 through 7, in increments of 1, are indicated. The vertical axis is labeled Price, and the numbers 0 through 18, in increments of 2, are indicated. The following 7 data points are indicated along the line. Point 1. 0 comma 12. Point 2. 1 comma 10. Point 3. 2 comma 8. Point 4. 3 comma 6. Point 5. 4 comma 4. Point 6. 5 comma 2. Point 7. 6 comma 0.
 
 
  
 
 
49. The graphs above show the individual demand curves for the only two consumers, Adey and Sarah, in the 
market for popcorn. As the price of popcorn decreases from $12 to $6, how does the quantity demanded change 
along the market demand curve? 
(A) It increases from 2 to 4 units. 
(B) It increases from 2 to 5 units. 
(C) It increases from 2 to 8 units. 
(D) It increases from 0 to 14 units. 
(E) It increases from 8 to 14 units. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-14- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50. Which of the following is true for a firm that uses 
labor as a variable input and capital as a fixed 
input in the short run? 
(A) If the marginal product of labor is negative, 
the average product of labor must also be 
negative. 
(B) If the marginal product of labor is rising, the 
average product of labor must be greater 
than the marginal product of labor. 
(C) If the average product of labor is rising, the 
marginal product of labor must be rising. 
(D) If the average product of labor is falling, the 
marginal product of labor must be less than 
the average product of labor. 
(E) The average product of labor can never be 
equal to the marginal product of labor. 
The figure presents a graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane, with the origin labeled 0. The horizontal axis is labeled Units of Output, and the following values are indicated from left to right: Q sub 1, Q sub 2, Q sub 3, Q sub 4, Q sub 5. The vertical axis represents price, in U S dollars. The graph has three curves that are labeled M C, A V C, and A T C. Curve M C begins in between the vertical axis and quantity Q sub 1, and about one fourth of the way up the vertical axis. It moves downward and to the right, reaches a minimum slightly to the left of quantity Q sub 1, and then turns to steeply move upward and to the right. It ends just to the right of quantity Q sub 5, near the top of the graph. Curve A V C begins slightly above and slightly to the right of where Curve M C begins, and moves downward and to the right. It intersects Curve M C at quantity Q sub 2, and then turns to move upward and to the right. It ends far to the right of quantity Q sub 5, and below where Curve M C ends. Curve A T C begins just to the right of where Curve A V C begins, and about three fourths of the way up the vertical axis. It steeply moves downward and to the right, intersects Curve M C at quantity Q sub 3, and then turns to steeply move upward and to the right. It ends just to the left and slightly above where Curve A V C ends. The following 5 points are identified on the graph: R, S, T, W, V. From Q sub 1 on the horizontal axis, a vertical grid line emanates upward and touches Curve M C, which identifies Point R. From Q sub 2 on the horizontal axis, a vertical grid line emanates upward and touches the intersection of curves M C and A V C, which identifies Point S. From Q sub 3 on the horizontal axis, a vertical grid line emanates upward, crosses Curve A V C, and touches the intersection of curves M C and A T C, which identifies Point T. From Q sub 4 on the horizontal axis, a vertical grid line emanates upward, crosses Curve A V C, and touches Curve A T C, which identifies Point W. From Q sub 5 on the horizontal axis, a vertical grid line emanates upward, crosses curves A V C and A T C, and touches Curve M C, which identifies Point V.
51. The graph above shows the cost curves facing 
May’s Fruit Farm, where  M C is marginal cost, 
 A T C is average total cost, and  A V C is average 
variable cost. May’s short-run supply curve 
includes which of the following points? 
(A)  T W 
(B)  R S T
(C)  S T V
(D)  S T W 
(E)  R S T V
52. The characteristic that causes firms in a perfectly 
competitive industry to earn zero economic profits 
in the long run is  
(A) firms are price takers 
(B) firms produce identical products 
(C) individual firms account for a small fraction 
of the total market 
(D) the industry supply curve is horizontal 
(E) there are no barriers to entry or exit 
53. If individual firms in a perfectly competitive 
market are earning positive economic profits,  
the number of firms and the price of the product 
in the market will most likely change in which  
of the following ways in the long run? 
Number of Firms 
Price 
(A) Increase 
Increase 
(B) Decrease 
Increase 
(C) Increase 
Decrease 
(D) Decrease 
Decrease 
(E) No change 
Decrease 
54. Jamal quits a job that was paying him $30,000  
per year and decides to start his own business. He 
runs his business out of his house in a room he 
had been renting to his colleague for $12,000 a 
year. Jamal withdraws the $20,000 in his savings 
account that had been earning him a 10 percent 
annual interest to purchase computers and related 
accessories and equipment for the business. 
During the first year of operation, Jamal’s 
business incurred $30,000 in explicit costs and 
generated $60,000 in total sales. Jamal’s 
economic profit is 
(A)  $30,000 
(B)  $17,000 
(C)  
$0 
(D)   negative $2,000
(E) 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-15- 
n
egative $14,000


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55. Firms in monopolistic competition do not  
attain allocative efficiency because at the  
long-run equilibrium output, which of the 
following is true? 
(A) Price is greater than marginal cost. 
(B) Marginal cost is greater than minimum 
average total cost. 
(C) Marginal revenue is greater than  
marginal cost. 
(D) There is an overallocation of resources  
to the market. 
(E) Products are homogeneous. 
56. A perfectly competitive firm is producing 10 units 
of output and sells the product for $5 per unit. At 
this level of output the average total cost is $4, the 
average variable cost is $3 and the marginal cost 
is $7. What should this firm do to maximize  
short-run profits? 
(A) Increase output until price equals average 
total cost. 
(B) Increase output until price equals  
marginal cost. 
(C) Leave output unchanged because price  
is greater than average total cost. 
(D) Decrease output until price is equal to 
marginal cost. 
(E) Decrease output until price is equal to 
average total cost. 
57. Assume accountants and teachers have identical 
marginal revenue product schedules. Which of  
the following provides an explanation for why 
accountants receive higher starting salaries than 
school teachers? 
(A) Accountants have less human capital than 
school teachers. 
(B) Accountants have lower opportunity cost 
than school teachers. 
(C) Accounting firms provide a more pleasant 
work environment than schools provide. 
(D) The supply of accountants is low relative to 
the supply of teachers. 
(E) Fewer teaching majors graduate from college 
each year than accounting majors. 
58. Assume that firms providing health-care services 
to older people operate in a perfectly competitive 
market. What must happen in the market for 
health-care workers if there is an increase in the 
number of older people in a country? 
(A) The demand for health-care workers will 
increase. 
(B) The marginal factor cost in the health-care 
industry will decrease. 
(C) The number of health-care workers will 
decrease. 
(D) The quality of health-care services will 
increase. 
(E) The wages of health-care workers will 
decrease. 
59. As an unregulated monopolist, City Cable is 
earning positive economic profits. If the 
government regulated the firm by requiring it to 
produce the level of output that allowed the firm 
to earn zero economic profit, City Cable would 
set a price that is equal to its 
(A) marginal cost 
(B) marginal revenue 
(C) average total cost 
(D) average variable cost 
(E) total cost 
60. A progressive income tax is characterized by 
(A) a higher average tax rate at low income levels 
than at high income levels 
(B) tax rates that increase total tax revenues 
(C) marginal tax rates that do not change as 
income changes 
(D) marginal tax rates that increase as income 
increases 
(E) marginal tax rates that decrease as income 
increases 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-16- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
END OF SECTION I 
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, YOU MAY 
CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS SECTION. 
DO NOT GO ON TO SECTION II UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE DONE THE FOLLOWING. 
PLACED YOUR AP NUMBER LABEL ON YOUR ANSWER SHEET 
WRITTEN AND GRIDDED YOUR AP NUMBER CORRECTLY ON YOUR  
ANSWER SHEET 
TAKEN THE AP EXAM LABEL FROM THE FRONT OF THIS BOOKLET  
AND PLACED IT ON YOUR ANSWER SHEET  
-17- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Microeconomics Exam 
2019 
SECTION II: Free Response 
DO NOT OPEN THIS BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
At a Glance 
Total Time 
1 hour 
Number of Questions 
3 
Percent of Total Score 
33.33% 
Writing Instrument 
Pen with black or dark 
blue ink 
Electronic Device 
None allowed 
Reading Period 
Time 
10 minutes. Use this 
time to read the 
questions and plan your 
answers.You may begin 
writing your responses 
before the reading 
period is over. 
Writing Period 
Time 
50 minutes 
Question 1 
Suggested Time 
25 minutes 
Percent of Section II Score 
50% 
Question 2 
Suggested Time 
12.5 minutes 
Percent of Section II Score 
25% 
Question 3 
Suggested Time 
12.5 minutes 
Percent of Section II Score 
25% 
Instructions 
The questions for Section II are printed in this booklet. You may use page 3 and the pages 
the questions are printed on to organize your answers and for scratch work, but you must 
write your answers on the lined pages provided for each question. 
The proctor will announce the beginning and end of the reading period. You are advised 
to spend the 10-minute period reading all the questions and planning your answers. You 
may begin writing your responses before the reading period is over. 
Write clearly and legibly. Do not skip lines. Cross out any errors you make; crossed-out 
work will not be scored. 
Manage your time carefully. You may proceed freely from one question to the next. You 
may review your responses if you finish before the end of the exam is announced. 
Form I 
Form Code 4PBP4-S 
34 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MICROECONOMICS 
Section II 
Total Time—1 hour 
Reading Period—10 minutes 
Writing Period—50 minutes 
Directions:  You are advised to spend the first 10 minutes reading all of the questions and planning your 
answers. You will then have 50 minutes to answer all three of the following questions. You may begin 
writing your responses before the reading period is over. It is suggested that you spend approximately half 
your time on the first question and divide the remaining time equally between the next two questions. 
Include correctly labeled diagrams, if useful or required, in explaining your answers. A correctly labeled 
diagram must have all axes and curves clearly labeled and must show directional changes. Use a pen with 
black or dark blue ink. 
Question 1 begins on page 4. 
Question 2 begins on page 10. 
Question 3 begins on page 14. 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS.  
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-3-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 1.  L and P Power is a natural monopoly supplying electricity for a city. The firm produces the profit-maximizing 
quantity of electricity and earns a positive economic profit. 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Describe a condition that distinguishes a natural monopoly from a typical monopoly. 
(b) Draw a correctly labeled graph for the natural monopoly market in which  L and P Power operates and show 
each of the following. 
(i) The profit-maximizing quantity, labeled  Q sub M 
(ii) The profit-maximizing price, labeled  P sub M 
 (iii) The area representing economic profit, shaded completely 
(c) Suppose the government wants to regulate  L and P to produce the maximum quantity that would allow it to 
earn zero economic profit. On your graph in part (b), show the maximum quantity it will produce to earn 
zero economic profit, labeled  Q sub R , and price, labeled  P sub R . 
(d) Suppose instead the government wants to regulate  L and P to produce the allocatively efficient quantity. 
(i) Does  L and P earn positive economic profit if it produces the allocatively efficient quantity? Explain. 
(ii) Under what condition will  L and P agree to produce the allocatively efficient quantity? 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS.  
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-4-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-5-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
1. L&P Power is a natural monopoly supplying electricity for a city. The firm produces the profit-maximizing 
quantity of electricity and earns a positive economic profit. 
(a) Describe a condition that distinguishes a natural monopoly from a typical monopoly. 
(b) Draw a correctly labeled graph for the natural monopoly market in which L&P Power operates and show 
each of the following. 
(i) The profit-maximizing quantity, labeled QM 
(ii) The profit-maximizing price, labeled PM 
(iii) The area representing economic profit, shaded completely 
(c) Suppose the government wants to regulate L&P to produce the maximum quantity that would allow it to 
earn zero economic profit. On your graph in part (b), show the maximum quantity it will produce to earn 
zero economic profit, labeled QR, and price, labeled PR. 
(d) Suppose instead the government wants to regulate L&P to produce the allocatively efficient quantity. 
(i) Does L&P earn positive economic profit if it produces the allocatively efficient quantity? Explain. 
(ii) Under what condition will L&P agree to produce the allocatively efficient quantity? 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS.  
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.  
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-6-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL PAGE FOR ANSWERING QUESTION 1 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-7-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL PAGE FOR ANSWERING QUESTION 1 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-8-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL PAGE FOR ANSWERING QUESTION 1 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-9-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. A movie theater company obtains the following estimated elasticities of demand.  
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The absolute value of the short-run price elasticity of demand for movie tickets is 0.85. 
The absolute value of the long-run price elasticity of demand for movie tickets is 3.2.  
The cross-price elasticity of demand for good X, another product sold by the theater, with respect to the 
price of movie tickets is  negative 0.26 . 
The income elasticity of demand for movie tickets is 0.75. 
Answer each of the following by referring to the given elasticities. 
(a) If the theater raises movie ticket prices by 10 percent, by what percentage and in what direction will the 
quantity demanded for movie tickets change in the short run?  
(b) Explain why the short-run price elasticity of demand for movie tickets differs from the long-run price 
elasticity of demand for movie tickets. 
(c) What will happen to total revenue from movie ticket sales in the long run if movie ticket prices increase? 
Explain using the relative percentage changes in price and quantity.  
(d) Are movie tickets a normal good or an inferior good? Explain.  
(e) Given the increase in the price of movie tickets in part (a), what would be the impact on the demand for  
good X? Use the appropriate graph for good X to illustrate your answer. 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS. 
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-10-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-11-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL PAGE FOR ANSWERING QUESTION 2 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-12-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL PAGE FOR ANSWERING QUESTION 2 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-13-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 3. In the small country of AgroIsland, the equilibrium price of wheat is $10 per bushel. Wheat is produced in  
a competitive industry. The world market price of wheat is $20 per bushel. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Assume that AgroIsland currently does not engage in international trade in wheat. Draw a correctly labeled 
graph to illustrate the market for wheat in AgroIsland and indicate the following. 
(i) The equilibrium price, labeled $10  
(ii) The equilibrium quantity, labeled  Q star 
 (iii) The domestic producer surplus, shaded completely and labeled 
 
P S 
(b) On the graph from part (a), show each of the following for AgroIsland if it engages in free trade in the world 
wheat market. 
(i) The world price of a bushel of wheat, labeled $20  
(ii) The quantity of wheat supplied by domestic producers, labeled  Q sub p 
 (iii) The domestic consumer surplus after trade, shaded completely and labeled  C S 
(c) Given your answers in part (b), how does each of the following change if AgroIsland engages in 
international trade in the wheat market? 
(i) The domestic consumer surplus 
(ii) The domestic producer surplus 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS. 
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-14-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 3 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-15-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL PAGE FOR ANSWERING QUESTION 3 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-16-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL PAGE FOR ANSWERING QUESTION 3 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-17-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
STOP 
END OF EXAM 
THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS APPLY TO THE COVERS OF THE  
SECTION II BOOKLET. 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE COMPLETED THE IDENTIFICATION  
INFORMATION AS REQUESTED ON THE FRONT AND BACK  
COVERS OF THE SECTION II BOOKLET. 
CHECK TO SEE THAT YOUR AP NUMBER LABEL APPEARS IN  
THE BOX ON THE FRONT COVER. 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE USED THE SAME SET OF AP  
NUMBER LABELS ON ALL AP EXAMS YOU HAVE TAKEN  
THIS YEAR. 
-18-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Answer Key for AP Micreconomics 
Practice Exam, Section I 
Question 1: A 
Question 2: D 
Question 3: E 
Question 4: D 
Question 5: E 
Question 6: E 
Question 7: E 
Question 8: C 
Question 9: A 
Question 10: D 
Question 11: D 
Question 12: D 
Question 13: B 
Question 14: A 
Question 15: C 
Question 16: A 
Question 17: B 
Question 18: A 
Question 19: E 
Question 20: B 
Question 21: C 
Question 22: C 
Question 23: A 
Question 24: A 
Question 25: D 
Question 26: E 
Question 27: C 
Question 28: B 
Question 29: A 
Question 30: C 
Question 31: E 
Question 32: E 
Question 33: C 
Question 34: A 
Question 35: B 
Question 36: B 
Question 37: E 
Question 38: E 
Question 39: A 
Question 40: D 
Question 41: C 
Question 42: E 
Question 43: E 
Question 44: C 
Question 45: C 
Question 46: E 
Question 47: D 
Question 48: B 
Question 49: C 
Question 50: D 
Question 51: C 
Question 52: E 
Question 53: C 
Question 54: E 
Question 55: A 
Question 56: D 
Question 57: D 
Question 58: A 
Question 59: C 
Question 60: D 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Multiple-Choice Section for Microeconomics 
2019 Course Framework Alignment and Rationales 
Question 1  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.A 
MKT-1.B 
Resource Allocation and 
Economic Systems 
(A)  
Correct. In a market economy, there is a reliance on signals provided 
by market prices for the allocation of resources. Private ownership of 
resources (or well-defined property rights—the right to own and use 
resources) is an important feature that provides incentives to 
producers and consumers to respond effectively to economic signals. 
Thus private ownership of resources is an essential element for 
markets to function well in allocating resources efficiently. 
(B)  
Incorrect. In a market economy, the production, distribution, and 
consumption of goods and services are based on the ownership of 
resources, and the resulting market distribution of income is not 
necessarily equitable. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Income taxes are not unique to a market economy. Other 
economic systems also have some form of an income tax system, by 
which governments collect taxes to finance public sector spending. 
(D)  
Incorrect. In a market economy, buyers and sellers interact through 
competitive markets to determine what will be produced, who will 
produce goods and services, and who will consume goods and 
services. Therefore, in a market system there is primarily a reliance 
on private goods, not public goods. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Government-guided resource allocation is a defining 
characteristic of a command economy, not a market economy. In a 
market economy, resources are allocated by competitive markets. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 2  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
MKT-1.C 
Production Possibilities 
Curve 
(A)  
Incorrect. The opportunity cost increases (not decreases) because as 
the production of good X increases, the production of good Y 
decreases by greater amounts. Producing the first 20 units of good X 
requires giving up 5 units of good Y, producing the next 20 units of 
good X requires giving up 10 units of good Y, producing the next 20 
units of good X requires giving up 20 units of good Y, producing the 
next 20 units of good X requires giving up 30 units of good Y, and 
producing the last 20 units of good X requires giving up 35 units of 
good Y. Thus, the opportunity cost increases (not decreases) as more 
of X is produced. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The opportunity cost increases (not decreases) because as 
the production of good X increases, the production of good Y 
decreases by greater amounts (not increases by smaller amounts). 
Producing the first 20 units of good X requires giving up 5 units of 
good Y, producing the next 20 units of good X requires giving up 10 
units of good Y, producing the next 20 units of good X requires 
giving up 20 units of good Y, producing the next 20 units of good X 
requires giving up 30 units of good Y, and producing the last 20 units 
of good X requires giving up 35 units of good Y. Thus, the 
opportunity cost increases (not decreases) as more of X is produced. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The opportunity cost increases (it does not remain 
constant) because as the production of good X increases, the 
production of good Y decreases by greater amounts. Producing the 
first 20 units of good X requires giving up 5 units of good Y, 
producing the next 20 units of good X requires giving up 10 units of 
good Y, producing the next 20 units of good X requires giving up 20 
units of good Y, producing the next 20 units of good X requires 
giving up 30 units of good Y, and producing the last 20 units of good 
X requires giving up 35 units of good Y. Thus, the opportunity cost 
increases (it does not remain constant) as more of X is produced. 
(D)  
Correct. The opportunity cost increases because as the production of 
good X increases, the production of good Y decreases by greater 
amounts. Producing the first 20 units of good X requires giving up 5 
units of good Y, producing the next 20 units of good X requires 
giving up 10 units of good Y, producing the next 20 units of good X 
requires giving up 20 units of good Y, producing the next 20 units of 
good X requires giving up 30 units of good Y, and producing the last 
20 units of good X requires giving up 35 units of good Y. Thus, the 
opportunity cost increases as more of X is produced. 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 2 (continued) 
(E)  
Incorrect. The opportunity cost increases because as the production 
of good X increases, the production of good Y decreases by greater 
amounts (it does not increase by smaller amounts). Producing the 
first 20 units of good X requires giving up 5 units of good Y, 
producing the next 20 units of good X requires giving up 10 units of 
good Y, producing the next 20 units of good X requires giving up 20 
units of good Y, producing the next 20 units of good X requires 
giving up 30 units of good Y, and producing the last 20 units of good 
X requires giving up 35 units of good Y. Thus, the opportunity cost 
increases as more of X is produced. 
 
 
Question 3  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
MKT-4.B 
Market Disequilibrium 
and Changes in 
Equilibrium 
(A)  
Incorrect. From the given information it is not possible to determine 
whether a good is inferior or normal. One needs to know the income 
elasticity of demand for good Y to determine whether the good is 
inferior or normal. The income elasticity of demand for an inferior 
good is negative, implying that as income increases the demand for 
the good decreases. 
(B)  
Incorrect. From the given information it is not possible to determine 
whether a good is a luxury or a necessity good. 
(C)  
Incorrect. From the given information it is not possible to determine 
whether a good is inferior or normal. One needs to know the income 
elasticity of demand for good Y to determine whether the good is 
inferior or normal. The income elasticity of demand for a normal 
good is positive, implying that as income increases the demand for 
the good decreases. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Goods are complements of one another if a decrease in the 
price of one good leads to an increase in demand for the other good. 
An increase in the supply of good X will cause the price of good X to 
decrease. The result of this change is an increase in the price and 
quantity of good Y, which would be caused by an increase in the 
demand for good Y. Therefore, goods X and Y are complements (not 
substitutes). 
(E)  
Correct. Goods are complements of one another if a decrease in the 
price of one good leads to an increase in demand for the other good. 
An increase in the supply of good X will cause the price of good X to 
decrease. The result of this change is an increase in the price and 
quantity of good Y, which would be caused by an increase in the 
demand for good Y. Therefore, goods X and Y are complements. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 4  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
MKT-3.D 
Supply 
(A)  
Incorrect. An increase in consumer income is a determinant of the 
demand for apples, not the supply. Therefore, the supply curve will 
not be affected. 
(B)  
Incorrect. An increase in the price of apples causes a movement up 
along the given supply curve (not a shift of the supply curve). The 
quantity supplied of apples is directly related to the price of apples. 
(C)  
Incorrect. An increase in the wages of apple pickers will raise the cost 
of production, causing the supply curve for apples to shift to the left 
(not to the right). 
(D)  
Correct. A decrease in the rental price for apple harvesting 
equipment will increase the productivity of workers and lower the 
cost of production, causing the supply curve for apples to shift to the 
right. 
(E)  
Incorrect. A decrease in the demand for oranges lowers the price of 
oranges. If oranges and apples are substitutes for each other, the 
decrease in the price of oranges will result in a decrease in the 
demand for apples, causing the demand curve to shift to the left 
along the given market supply curve; it does not shift the supply 
curve. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 5  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
3.A 
MKT-3.E 
Price Elasticity of 
Demand 
(A)  
Incorrect. When demand is elastic, the quantity effect outweighs the 
price effect; that is, the percentage change in quantity demanded 
exceeds the percentage change in price. Thus, an increase in price 
will result in a decrease (not an increase) in total revenue. 
(B)  
Incorrect. When demand is elastic, the quantity effect outweighs the 
price effect; that is, the percentage change in quantity demanded 
exceeds the percentage change in price. Thus, a decrease in price will 
result in an increase (not a decrease) in total revenue. 
(C)  
Incorrect. When demand is unit elastic, the quantity effect exactly 
offsets the price effect; that is, the percentage change in quantity 
demanded equals the percentage change in price. Thus, a decrease in 
price will result in no change (not a decrease) in total revenue. 
(D)  
Incorrect. When demand is inelastic, the price effect outweighs the 
quantity effect; that is, the percentage change in price exceeds the 
percentage change in quantity demanded. Thus, a decrease in price 
will result in a decrease (not an increase) in total revenue. 
(E)  
Correct. When demand is inelastic, the price effect outweighs the 
quantity effect; that is, the percentage change in price exceeds the 
percentage change in quantity demanded. Thus, a decrease in price 
will result in a decrease in total revenue. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 6  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
CBA-2.A 
Marginal Analysis and 
Consumer Choice 
(A)  
Incorrect. The response refers to an equilibrium in a market for each 
good, which maximizes total economic surplus but not the total 
utility for an individual consumer. Given limited income, a utility-
maximizing consumer will choose the quantity of each good such 
that the marginal utility of the last dollar spent on one good is equal 
to the marginal utility of the last dollar spent on the other good. That 
is, the extra utility per dollar spent must be the same for the last unit 
of each good. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The response refers to a situation where a consumer will 
consume each good if the goods were to be offered for free, in which 
case the consumer would choose the quantity of each good where the 
marginal utility of the last unit is zero. Given limited income and the 
prices of the goods, the consumer maximizes utility by choosing the 
combination of the two goods such that marginal utility of the last 
dollar spent on one good is equal to the marginal utility of the last 
dollar spent on the other good. That is, the extra utility per dollar 
spent must be the same for the last unit of each good. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Given limited income and the prices of the goods, a 
consumer maximizes utility by choosing the combination of the two 
goods such that the marginal utility of the last dollar spent on one 
good is equal to the marginal utility of the last dollar spent on the 
other good. That is, the extra utility per dollar spent must be the 
same for the last unit of each good. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The response refers to the decision rule a firm would use 
to determine the profit-maximizing quantity of output. That is, a 
firm selects the level of output at which marginal revenue equals 
marginal cost to maximize profit. Given limited income and the 
prices of the goods, a consumer maximizes utility by choosing the 
combination of the two goods such that the marginal utility of the 
last dollar spent on one good is equal to the marginal utility of the 
last dollar spent on the other good. That is, the extra utility per dollar 
spent must be the same for the last unit of each good. 
(E)  
Correct. Given limited income and the prices of the goods, a 
consumer maximizes utility by choosing the combination of the two 
goods such that the marginal utility of the last dollar spent on one 
good is equal to the marginal utility of the last dollar spent on the 
other good. That is, the extra utility per dollar spent must be the 
same for the last unit of each good. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 7  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.A 
CBA-2.B 
Marginal Analysis and 
Consumer Choice 
(A)  
Incorrect. The marginal benefit is the change in total utility (not 
average utility) that results from one more unit of the good. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Marginal benefit is not the same as the total benefit 
(utility). The marginal benefit is the change in total utility that results 
from one more unit of the good. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Marginal benefit is a measure of the benefit a consumer 
derives from consuming each unit of the good; it is not the same as 
marginal cost. Marginal cost is related to the production of the good, 
the cost associated with producing one extra unit of the good. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The response refers to the marginal expenditure, which is 
the change in total expenditure when the consumer purchases one 
more unit of the good. The marginal benefit of consuming a good is 
the change in total utility (not total expenditures) as a result of 
buying one more unit of the good. 
(E)  
Correct. A consumer’s willingness to pay reflects how much the 
consumer values the good or service. Specifically, the demand curve 
reflects the marginal value of each unit of the good, which is equal to 
the maximum amount the consumer is willing to pay for that unit. 
The marginal value decreases as quantity increases. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 8  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.A 
MKT-4.A 
Market Equilibrium and 
Consumer and Producer 
Surplus 
(A)  
Incorrect. Consumer surplus does not refer to the difference between 
the quantity purchased and the quantity consumed. Consumer 
surplus is a measure of the benefit a consumer receives from 
participating in the market. It is the difference between the 
maximum price a consumer is willing to pay and the price the 
consumer actually pays. In the context of the demand curve, 
consumer surplus is given by the area under the demand curve that is 
above the price. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The response refers to the production side of the market. 
Consumer surplus is a measure of the benefit a consumer receives 
from the buyer’s side of the market. Consumer surplus is the 
difference between the maximum price a consumer is willing to pay 
and the price the consumer actually pays. In the context of the 
demand curve, consumer surplus is given by the area under the 
demand curve that is above the price. 
(C)  
Correct. Consumer surplus is a measure of the benefit a consumer 
receives from participating in the market. It is the difference between 
the maximum price a consumer is willing to pay and the price the 
consumer actually pays. In the context of the demand curve, 
consumer surplus is given by the area under the demand curve that is 
above the price. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The response refers to the total market surplus, which is 
the sum of the producer and consumer surpluses. It is not equal to 
the consumer surplus. The consumer surplus is the difference 
between the maximum price a consumer is willing to pay and the 
price the consumer actually pays. In the context of the demand 
curve, consumer surplus is given by the area under the demand curve 
that is above the price. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Consumer surplus does not refer to the difference between 
the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied. Consumer surplus 
is a measure of the benefit a consumer receives from participating in 
the market. It is the difference between the maximum price a 
consumer is willing to pay and the price the consumer actually pays. 
In the context of the demand curve, consumer surplus is given by the 
area under the demand curve that is above the price. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 9  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
PRD-1.A 
Short-Run Production 
Costs 
(A)  
Correct. The variable cost for the first unit is $130
$60
$70.
−
=
 
The variable cost for the second unit is $180
$60
$120.
−
=
 
Therefore, the marginal cost of producing the second unit is 
(
)
$120
$70 / 1
$50.
−
=
 
(B)  
Incorrect. The response uses the fixed cost as the marginal cost. The 
variable cost for the first unit is $130
$60
$70.
−
=
 The variable cost 
for the second unit is $180
$60
$120.
−
=
 Therefore, the marginal 
cost of producing the second unit is (
)
$120
$70 / 1
$50.
−
=
 
(C)  
Incorrect. The response uses the variable cost, which is also equal to 
the marginal cost of the first unit. The variable cost for the first unit 
is $130
$60
$70.
−
=
 The variable cost for the second unit is 
$180
$60
$120.
−
=
 Therefore, the marginal cost of producing the 
second unit is (
)
$120
$70 / 1
$50.
−
=
 
(D)  
Incorrect. The response uses the average total cost of producing two 
units as the marginal cost. The variable cost for the first unit is 
$130
$60
$70.
−
=
 The variable cost for the second unit is 
$180
$60
$120.
−
=
 Therefore, the marginal cost of producing the 
second unit is (
)
$120
$70 / 1
$50.
−
=
 
(E)  
Incorrect. The response uses the total cost of producing two units as 
the marginal cost. The variable cost for the first unit is 
$130
$60
$70.
−
=
 The variable cost for the second unit is 
$180
$60
$120.
−
=
 Therefore, the mar
 
ginal cost of producing the 
second unit is (
)
$120
$70 / 1
$50.
−
=
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 10  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-3.A 
Perfect Competition 
(A)  
Incorrect. The profit-maximizing quantity occurs at the output 
quantity at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. The firm 
depicted in the graph operates in a perfectly competitive market; its 
price is the same as marginal revenue and equal to the horizontal 
demand curve. To maximize profit the firm should produce where 
MR
MC,
=
 which occurs at 
3
Q ,  not zero. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The profit-maximizing quantity occurs at the output 
quantity at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. The firm 
depicted in the graph operates in a perfectly competitive market; its 
price is the same as marginal revenue and equal to the horizontal 
demand curve. To maximize profit the firm should produce where 
MR
MC,
=
 which occurs at 
3
Q ,  not 
1
Q . 
(C)  
Incorrect. The profit-maximizing quantity occurs at the output 
quantity at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. The firm 
depicted in the graph operates in a perfectly competitive market; its 
price is the same as marginal revenue and equal to the horizontal 
demand curve. To maximize profit the firm should produce where 
MR
MC,
=
 which occurs at 
3
Q ,  not 
2
Q .  
(D)  
Correct. The profit-maximizing quantity occurs at the output 
quantity at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. The firm 
depicted in the graph operates in a perfectly competitive market; its 
price is the same as marginal revenue and equal to the horizontal 
demand curve. To maximize profit the firm should produce where 
MR
MC,
=
 which occurs at 
3
Q . 
(E)  
Incorrect. The profit-maximizing quantity occurs at the output 
quantity at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost. The firm 
depicted in the graph operates in a perfectly competitive market; its 
price is the same as marginal revenue and equal to the horizontal 
demand curve. To maximize profit the firm should produce where 
MR
MC,
=
 which occurs at 
3
Q ,  not 
4
Q .  
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 11  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
PRD-1.A 
Long-Run Production 
Costs 
(A)  
Incorrect. Returns to scale is a long-run concept that describes what 
happens to output when all inputs are increased or decreased by the 
same proportion. With constant returns to scale, proportional 
changes in all inputs result in an equal proportional increase in 
output. A change of 40 workers, 8 units of capital and 100 units of 
output is not consistent with constant returns to scale, because the 
number of workers doubled, the amount of capital remained 
constant, and output increased to 100. This is a short-run 
phenomenon in which one input is fixed, in this case, capital. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Returns to scale is a long-run concept that describes what 
happens to output when all inputs are increased or decreased by the 
same proportion. With constant returns to scale, proportional 
changes in all inputs result in an equal proportional increase in 
output. A change of 40 workers, 16 units of capital and 90 units of 
output is not consistent with constant returns to scale, because the 
number of inputs doubled, and output less than doubled. The 
situation is known as decreasing returns to scale, not constant 
returns to scale. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Returns to scale is a long-run concept that describes what 
happens to output when all inputs are increased or decreased by the 
same proportion. With constant returns to scale, proportional 
changes in all inputs result in an equal proportional increase in 
output. The response does not show an equal proportional change in 
the inputs and output, and therefore it is not consistent with 
constant returns to scale. 
(D)  
Correct. Returns to scale is a long-run concept that describes what 
happens to output when all inputs are increased or decreased by the 
same proportion. With constant returns to scale, proportional 
changes in all inputs result in an equal proportional increase in 
output. A change of 10 workers, 4 units of capital and 25 units of 
output is consistent with constant returns to scale, because the 
amount of inputs  changed by 50 percent each (i.e., the number of 
workers changed by 10 from 20 and the units of capital changed by 4 
from 8), and the amount of output also changed by 50 percent (i.e., a 
change of 25 units of output from 50). 
(E)  
Incorrect. Returns to scale is a long-run concept that describes what 
happens to output when all inputs are increased or decreased by the 
same proportion. With constant returns to scale, proportional 
changes in all inputs result in an equal proportional increase in 
output. The response does not show equal proportional changes in 
the inputs and output, and therefore it is not consistent with 
constant returns to scale. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 12  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.C 
PRD-3.C 
Oligopoly and Game 
Theory 
(A)  
Incorrect. In a perfectly competitive market, there are a large number 
of firms with each firm accounting for a very small fraction of the 
total market output. This is inconsistent with the scenario described 
in the question. In the scenario provided, there are four firms that 
dominate the market, which is consistent with the characteristics of 
an oligopoly, not a perfectly competitive market. 
(B)  
Incorrect. With a pure monopoly, there is only firm, and the 
monopolist produces the entire market output. This is inconsistent 
with the scenario described in the question. In the scenario provided, 
there are four firms that dominate the market, which is consistent 
with the characteristics of an oligopoly, not a pure monopoly. 
(C)  
Incorrect. A natural monopoly exists when a single firm can supply 
the entire market at a lower average total cost than two or more can; 
the one firm supplies the entire market. This is inconsistent with the 
scenario described in the question. In the scenario provided, there 
are four firms that dominate the market, which is consistent with the 
characteristics of an oligopoly, not a natural monopoly. 
(D)  
Correct. In an oligopoly, there are few firms in the market, and they 
dominate the market. In the scenario provided, the four largest firms 
produce 88 percent of total industry output, which is consistent with 
the characteristics of an oligopoly. 
(E)  
Incorrect. A monopsony is a market in which there is a single buyer 
of labor services. The scenario provided describes the output of the 
industry and does not comment on the input market. In the scenario 
provided, the four largest firms produce 88% of total industry 
output, which is consistent with the characteristics of an oligopoly. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 13  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopolistic 
Competition 
(A)  
Incorrect. Monopolistic competition is a market structure that 
consists of many firms producing differentiated products in a market 
with few or no barriers to entry or exit. Product differentiation (not 
economies of scale in production) allows each firm to have market 
power over its differentiated product. 
(B)  
Correct. Monopolistic competition is a market structure that 
consists of many firms producing differentiated products in a market 
with few or no barriers to entry or exit. Product differentiation 
allows each firm to have market power over its differentiated 
product. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Monopolistic competition is a market structure that 
consists of many firms producing differentiated products in a market 
with few or no barriers to entry or exit. Product differentiation (not 
the absence of perfectly competitive firms) allows each firm to have 
market power over its differentiated product. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Monopolistic competition is a market structure that 
consists of many firms producing differentiated products in a market 
with few or no barriers to entry or exit. Product differentiation 
allows each firm to have market power over its differentiated 
product. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Monopolistic competition is a market structure that 
consists of many firms producing differentiated products in a market 
with few or no barriers to entry or exit. Product differentiation (not 
maintaining excess capacity) allows each firm to have market power 
over its differentiated product. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 14  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing 
Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor 
Markets 
(A)  
Correct. A firm determines the profit-maximizing quantity of labor 
by equating the marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  to the 
marginal factor cost (
)
MFC ,  which is equal to the wage rate in a 
perfectly competitive market. MRPL equals the marginal product of 
the last worker times the marginal revenue. At the profit-maximizing 
quantity of labor the MRPL equals the MFC,  that is, 
(
)
MP
MR
MFC;
×
=
 thus the marginal revenue must be 
$20 / $10
$2.
=
 
(B)  
Incorrect. A firm determines the profit-maximizing quantity of labor 
by equating the marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  to the 
marginal factor cost (
)
MFC ,  which is equal to the wage rate in a 
perfectly competitive market. MRPL equals the marginal product of 
the last worker times the marginal revenue. At the profit-maximizing 
quantity of labor the MRPL equals the MFC,  that is, 
(
)
MP
MR
MFC;
×
=
 thus the marginal revenue must be 
$20 / $10
$2
=
 (not $20 ). 
(C)  
Incorrect. The marginal revenue is constant if the firm is perfectly 
competitive (that is, it does not increase as output produced 
increases). If the firm is imperfectly competitive, its marginal 
revenue decreases (not increases) as more output is produced and 
sold. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The marginal revenue is constant if the firm is perfectly 
competitive (that is, it does not increase first and then decrease as 
output produced increases). If the firm is imperfectly competitive, its 
marginal revenue decreases as more output is produced and sold. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The marginal revenue is constant if the firm is perfectly 
competitive (that is, it does not decrease first and then increase as 
output produced increases). If the firm is imperfectly competitive, its 
marginal revenue decreases (not increases) as more output is 
produced and sold. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 15  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
3.A 
POL-3.A 
Externalities 
(A)  
Incorrect. The demand curve for the good is completely vertical at 
the market equilibrium quantity. Even though the production of the 
good entails an external cost (negative externality), the equilibrium 
quantity produced is the same as the socially optimal quantity; 
therefore, there would no deadweight loss. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The demand curve for the good is completely vertical at 
the market equilibrium quantity. Even if marginal costs are constant, 
the quantity produced remains at the market equilibrium, which is 
socially optimal. There would be no deadweight loss. 
(C)  
Correct. The demand curve for the good is completely vertical at the 
market equilibrium quantity. Even though the production of the 
good entails an external cost (negative externality), the equilibrium 
quantity produced is the same as the socially optimal quantity; 
therefore, there would be no deadweight loss. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Even if marginal costs are constant, the quantity produced 
remains at the market equilibrium, which is socially optimal. There 
would be no deadweight loss. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Even if fixed costs are zero, the market equilibrium 
quantity will not change since the demand curve is perfectly inelastic. 
Thus, there would be no deadweight loss. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 16  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.A 
MKT-1.C 
Production Possibilities 
Curve 
(A)  
Correct. A linear production possibilities curve has a constant slope, 
meaning that the trade-off between the two variables described by 
the linear function is constant. Therefore, the opportunity cost is 
constant. 
(B)  
Incorrect. A linear production possibilities curve has a constant 
slope, meaning that the trade-off between the two variables described 
by the linear function is constant. Therefore, the opportunity cost is 
constant (it does not decrease). 
(C)  
Incorrect. A linear production possibilities curve has a constant 
slope, meaning that the trade-off between the two variables described 
by the linear function is constant. Therefore, the opportunity cost is 
constant (it does not increase). 
(D)  
Incorrect. A linear production possibilities curve has a constant 
slope. As more of one good is produced, the reduction in the 
production of the other good remains constant (it does not 
diminish). 
(E)  
Incorrect. The intensity of a factor input (labor) does not indicate 
whether the production possibilities curve will be linear. A linear 
production possibilities curve has a constant slope, and therefore, it 
indicates that the opportunity cost is constant. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 17  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
3.C 
POL-1.A 
The Effects of 
Government 
Intervention in Markets 
(A)  
Incorrect. The tax creates a wedge between the price paid by buyers 
and the price received by sellers. The per-unit tax shifts the supply 
curve to the left by the amount of the tax, raising the price to $8 and 
decreasing the quantity exchanged to 100 units. Thus, the price paid 
by buyers rises to $8, and the price received by sellers falls to $4  
(not $6). The deadweight loss is given by the area of the triangle 
between the price of $8 and $4 and the quantity of 100 units and 200 
units. That is, the deadweight loss is equal to 
(
)
(
)
(
)
$8
$4
200
100
/ 2
$200,
−
×
−
=
 not $100. 
(B)  
Correct. The tax creates a wedge between the price paid by buyers 
and the price received by sellers. The per-unit tax shifts the supply 
curve to the left by the amount of the tax, raising the price to $8 and 
decreasing the quantity exchanged to 100 units. Thus, the price paid 
by buyers rises to $8, and the price received by sellers falls to $4.  
The deadweight loss is given by the area of the triangle between  
the price of $8 and $4 and the quantity of 100 units and 200 units. 
That is, the deadweight loss is equal to 
(
)
(
)
(
)
$8
$4
200
100
/ 2
$200.
−
×
−
=
 
(C)  
Incorrect. The tax creates a wedge between the price paid by buyers 
and the price received by sellers. The per-unit tax shifts the supply 
curve to the left by the amount of the tax, raising the price to $8 and 
decreasing the quantity exchanged to 100 units. Thus, the price paid 
by buyers rises to $8 not $6), and the price received by sellers falls to 
$4 (not $6). The deadweight loss is given by the area of the triangle 
between the price of $8 and $4 and the quantity of 100 units and 200 
units. That is, the deadweight loss is equal to 
(
)
(
)
(
)
$8
$4
200
100
/ 2
$200,
−
×
−
=
 not $0. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The tax creates a wedge between the price paid by buyers 
and the price received by sellers. The per-unit tax shifts the supply 
curve to the left by the amount of the tax, raising the price to $8 and 
decreasing the quantity exchanged to 100 units. Thus, the price paid 
by buyers rises to $8 (not $4), and the price received by sellers falls to 
$4 (not $8). The deadweight loss is given by the area of the triangle 
between the price of $8 and $4 and the quantity of 100 units and 200 
units. That is, the deadweight loss is equal to 
(
)
(
)
(
)
$8
$4
200
100
/ 2
$200,
−
×
−
=
 not $100. 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 17 (continued) 
(E) 
Incorrect. The tax creates a wedge between the price paid by buyers 
and the price received by sellers. The per-unit tax shifts the supply 
curve to the left by the amount of the tax, raising the price to $8 and 
decreasing the quantity exchanged to 100 units. Thus, the price paid 
by buyers rises to $8 (not $4), and the price received by sellers falls to 
$4 (not $8). The deadweight loss is given by the area of the triangle 
between the price of $8 and $4 and the quantity of 100 units and 200 
units. That is, the deadweight loss is equal to 
(
)
(
)
(
)
$8
$4
200
100
/ 2
$200.
−
×
−
=
 
Question 18 
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C
PRD-1.A 
Short-Run Production 
Costs 
(A) 
Correct. When ATC is greater than MC, the marginal cost is rising 
and the ATC is falling with increases in output. Producing one less 
unit of output raises ATC; therefore, the ATC of producing the 
ninth unit is greater than $150. 
(B) 
Incorrect. When ATC is greater than MC, the marginal cost is rising 
and the ATC is falling with increases in output. Producing one less 
unit of output raises ATC; therefore, the ATC of producing the 
ninth unit is greater than $150 (not less than $150). 
(C) 
Incorrect. When ATC is greater than MC, the marginal cost is rising 
and the ATC is falling with increases in output. Producing one less 
unit of output lowers the MC  (not raises it); thus the MC of 
producing the ninth unit is less than $130 (not greater). 
(D) 
Incorrect. The average variable cost(AVC)  is less than the ATC at all 
output levels. Therefore, the AVC of producing the tenth unit is less 
than $150 (not greater than $150). 
(E) 
Incorrect. From the given information it is not possible to determine 
the value of the AVC  as $20 However, given the ATC is $150 and 
the MC is $130 the AVC is less than the ATC, but not as low as $20. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 19  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
3.A 
MKT-3.A 
Demand 
(A)  
Incorrect. The substitution effect is one of the factors that explains 
why the demand curve slopes downward. It explains a movement 
down along the demand curve for a normal good when the price of 
the good increases, not a shift of the demand curve. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The substitution effect is one of the factors that explains 
why the demand curve slopes downward. It explains a movement 
down along the demand curve for a normal good when the price of 
the good increases, not a change in the demand for a complementary 
good. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The substitution effect is one of the factors that explains 
why the demand curve slopes downward. It explains a movement 
down along the demand curve for a normal good when the price of 
the good increases. It is not a price change that makes the demand 
for a good more elastic. 
(D)  
Incorrect. When the price of a normal good increases, the demand 
for the substitute good increases, which is a shift of the demand 
curve, not a movement down along the demand curve for the good 
whose price has increased. 
(E)  
Correct. The substitution effect is one of the factors that explains 
why the demand curve slopes downward. It explains a movement 
down along the demand curve for a normal good when the price of 
the good increases. When the price of a normal good increases, 
buyers will substitute the higher-priced good for a lesser-priced 
substitute, and therefore buyers will decrease the quantity demanded 
of the good whose price has increased. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 20  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
PRD-1.A 
The Production 
Function 
(A)  
Incorrect. The marginal product of the first worker is 10, of the 
second worker is 15, of the third worker is 10, and so on. The 
marginal product begins to decline with the third worker. The 
maximum number of workers the firm can hire before diminishing 
returns set in is 2, not 1. 
(B)  
Correct. The marginal product of the first worker is 10, of the second 
worker is 15, of the third worker is 10, and so on. The marginal 
product begins to decline with the third worker. The maximum 
number of workers the firm can hire before diminishing returns set 
in is 2. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The marginal product of the first worker is 10, of the 
second worker is 15, of the third worker is 10, and so on. The 
marginal product begins to decline with the third worker. The 
maximum number of workers the firm can hire before diminishing 
returns set in is 2, not 3. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The marginal product of the first worker is 10, of the 
second worker is 15, of the third worker is 10, and so on. The 
marginal product begins to decline with the third worker. The 
maximum number of workers the firm can hire before diminishing 
returns set in is 2, not 4. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The marginal product of the first worker is 10, of the 
second worker is 15, of the third worker is 10, and so on. The 
marginal product begins to decline with the third worker. The 
maximum number of workers the firm can hire before diminishing 
returns set in is 2, not 5. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 21  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopoly 
(A)  
Incorrect. The profit-maximizing output 
1
Q occurs where 
MC
MR,
=
and the price 
4
P  (not 1P ) is above 
1
Q on the demand 
curve. Economic profit is given by the area 
2 4
P P IM  (not 
1
1
0P LQ ). 
(B)  
Incorrect. The profit-maximizing output 
1
Q occurs where 
MC
MR,
=
and the price 
4
P  is above 
1
Q on the demand curve. 
Economic profit is given by the area 
2 4
P P IM  (not 1 4
P P IL ). 
(C)  
Correct. The profit-maximizing output 
1
Q occurs where 
MC
MR,
=
and the price 
4
P  is above 
1
Q on the demand curve. 
Economic profit is given by the area 
2 4
P P IM.  
(D)  
Incorrect. The profit-maximizing output 
1
Q  (not 
2
Q ) occurs where 
MC
MR,
=
and the price 
4
P  (not 
3
P ) is above 
1
Q on the demand 
curve. Economic profit is given by the area 
2 4
P P IM  (not 
2 3
P P NM ). 
(E)  
Incorrect. The profit-maximizing output 
1
Q  (not 
3
Q ) occurs where 
MC
MR,
=
and the price 
4
P  (not 1P ) is above 
1
Q on the demand 
curve. Economic profit is given by the area 
2 4
P P IM  (not 1 2
P P ML ). 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 22  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.C 
PRD-3.C 
Oligopoly and Game 
Theory 
(A)  
Incorrect. The dominant strategy for Daily Voice is to Increase 
Subscription Price (rather than Do Not Change Subscription Price). 
If Town Herald selects Do Not Change Subscription Price, Daily 
Voice does best by also selecting to Increase Subscription Price 
(
)
$600
$500 .
>
If Town Herald chooses to Increase Subscription 
Price, Daily Voice does best by also selecting to Increase Subscription 
Price (
)
$300
$200 .
>
Therefore, Increase Subscription Price is a 
dominant strategy for Daily Voice. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Town Herald does not have a dominant strategy. Its best 
strategy depends on the strategy chosen by Daily Voice. If Daily 
Voice chooses Do Not Change Subscription Price, Town Herald does 
best by choosing to Increase Subscription Price (
)
$700
$400 .
>
If 
Daily Voice chooses Increase Subscription Price, Town Herald does 
best by choosing Do Not Change Subscription Price (
)
$300
$100 .
>
 
(C)  
Correct. If Town Herald selects Do Not Change Subscription Price, 
Daily Voice does best by selecting to Increase Subscription Price 
If Town Herald chooses to Increase Subscription 
Price, Daily Voice does best by also selecting to Increase Subscription 
Price (
)
$300
$200 .
>
Therefore, Increase Subscription Price is a 
dominant strategy for Daily Voice. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Town Herald does not have a dominant strategy. Its best 
strategy depends on the strategy chosen by Daily Voice. If Daily 
Voice chooses Do Not Change Subscription Price, Town Herald does 
best by choosing to Increase Subscription Price (
)
$700
$400 .
>
If 
Daily Voice chooses Increase Subscription Price, Town Herald does 
best by choosing Do Not Change Subscription Price (
)
$300
$100 .
>
 
(E)  
Incorrect. Daily Voice has a dominant strategy to Increase 
Subscription Price. If Town Herald selects Do Not Change 
Subscription Price, Daily Voice does best by selecting to Increase 
Subscription Price (
)
$600
$500 .
>
If Town Herald chooses to 
Increase Subscription Price, Daily Voice does best by also selecting to 
Increase Subscription Price (
)
$300
$200 .
>
Therefore, Increase 
Subscription Price is a dominant strategy for Daily Voice. Town 
Herald has no dominant strategy; its best strategy depends on the 
strategy chosen by Daily Voice. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 23  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.A 
PRD-3.B 
Price Discrimination 
(A)  
Correct. Under perfect price discrimination, a firm charges each 
consumer the maximum price the consumer is willing to pay. By 
doing so, the firm can increase its profit more than it can by selling 
the good for a single price. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Under perfect price discrimination, a firm charges each 
consumer the maximum price the consumer is willing to pay (not a 
price equal to the average cost of the product). By doing so, the firm 
can increase its profit more than it can by selling the good for a single 
price. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Under perfect price discrimination, a firm charges each 
consumer the maximum price the consumer is willing to pay (not 
the lowest price the customer is willing to pay). By doing so, the firm 
can increase its profit more than it can by selling the good for a single 
price. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Under perfect price discrimination, a firm charges each 
consumer the maximum price the consumer is willing to pay. The 
price the firm charges is based on willingness to pay, not other 
characteristics such as age, elasticity of demand, location, etc. to 
differentiate buyers into different subgroups. That type of price 
setting is not perfect price discrimination. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Under perfect price discrimination, a firm charges each 
consumer the maximum price the consumer is willing to pay, and 
does not set prices on the basis of other factors that can be used to 
group buyers into two or more subgroups. Such grouping of buyers 
leads to a different form of price discrimination, but not perfect price 
discrimination. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 24  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
PRD-2.A 
Firms' Short-Run 
Decisions to Produce 
and Long-Run 
Decisions to Enter or 
Exit a Market 
(A)  
Correct. The firm currently produces the 100 units where marginal 
cost equals marginal revenue. The price, $6, is less than the average 
variable cost. By continuing to operate, the firm incurs a loss greater 
than its fixed cost. Therefore, the firm will shut down in the short 
run to minimize its losses. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Producing less than 100 units will cause the firm to move 
away from the profit-maximizing or loss-minimizing level of output. 
Doing so will raise the average variable cost higher than $7, making 
the losses worse. Producing less output is not a viable option for the 
firm. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Producing more than 100 units will cause the firm to move 
away from the profit-maximizing or loss-minimizing level of output. 
Doing so will raise both the average variable cost and the marginal 
cost, making the losses worse. Producing more output is not a viable 
option for the firm. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Continuing to produce 100 units of output is 
unsustainable for the firm because the loss it is incurring is greater 
than its fixed cost. It should shut down to minimize its losses. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The firm operates in a perfectly competitive market. The 
firm has no ability to change the market price because it is a price 
taker. Raising the price is not an option for the firm. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 25  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.C 
PRD-1.A 
The Production 
Function 
(A)  
Incorrect. The response indicates the marginal product of the sixth 
worker, not the third worker. The marginal product of the third 
worker is 24 units. The quantity of output with two workers is 30 
units; the output increases to 54 when the third worker is added. 
Therefore, the marginal product of the third worker is 
(
) (
)
54
30 / 3
2
24
−
−
=
units. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The response indicates the marginal product of the first 
worker, not the third worker. The marginal product of the third 
worker is 24 units. The quantity of output with two workers is 30 
units; the output increases to 54 when the third worker is added. 
Therefore, the marginal product of the third worker is 
(
) (
)
54
30 / 3
2
24
−
−
=
units. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The response indicates the marginal product of the second 
worker, not the third worker. The marginal product of the third 
worker is 24 units. The quantity of output with two workers is 30 
units; the output increases to 54 when the third worker is added. 
Therefore, the marginal product of the third worker is 
(
) (
)
54
30 / 3
2
24
−
−
=
units. 
(D)  
Correct. The marginal product of the third worker is 24 units. The 
quantity of output with two workers is 30 units; the output increases 
to 54 when the third worker is added. Therefore, the marginal 
product of the third worker is (
) (
)
54
30 / 3
2
24
−
−
=
units. 
(E)  
Incorrect. There is sufficient information to determine the marginal 
product of the third worker. The marginal product of the third 
worker is 24 units. The quantity of output with two workers is 30 
units; the output increases to 54 when the third worker is added. 
Therefore, the marginal product of the third worker is 
(
) (
)
54
30 / 3
2
24
−
−
=
units. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 26  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing 
Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor 
Markets 
(A)  
Incorrect. The firm will not shut down if the price is $10 because 
there are several units of output at which the value of the marginal 
product (the marginal revenue product) exceeds the marginal factor 
cost of $100, which is equal to the wage rate per day. 
(B)  
Incorrect. For the first and second unit of labor the marginal product 
is rising, and a profit-maximizing firm will not stop producing in a 
region of increasing marginal returns when marginal product is 
rising; it should continue to increase production to the region where 
diminishing returns are observed. 
(C)  
Incorrect. For the first and second unit of labor the marginal product 
is rising, and a profit-maximizing firm will not stop producing in a 
region of increasing marginal returns when marginal product is 
rising; it should continue to increase production to the region where 
diminishing returns are observed. 
(D)  
Incorrect. To produce 54 units of output the firm uses 3 workers, 
with the marginal product of the third worker being 24 units. The 
value of the marginal product of labor (
)
$10
24
$240
×
=
exceeds 
the marginal factor cost, $100. To maximize profit the firm should 
continue to increase output until the value of the marginal product 
(marginal revenue product) equals the marginal factor cost, which 
occurs when the firm produces 85 units and the price is $10. 
(E)  
Correct. If the firm produces 85 units and sells at $10, the marginal 
product of the fifth worker is 10 units. The value of the marginal 
product of labor (marginal revenue product) equals the marginal 
factor cost. That is, (
)
$10
10
$100,
×
=
 which is equal to the 
marginal factor cost of $100. Thus, profit is maximized. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 27  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.C 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing 
Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor 
Markets 
(A)  
Incorrect. The marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  is 
defined as the marginal product of labor (
)
MPL times marginal 
revenue (
)
MR . The MRPL of the fourth hour of labor is equal to 
7
$2
$14
×
=
 (not $4). 
(B)  
Incorrect. The marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  is 
defined as the marginal product of labor (
)
MPL times marginal 
revenue (
)
MR . The MRPL of the fourth hour of labor is equal to 
7
$2
$14
×
=
 (not $7). 
(C)  
Correct. The marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  is defined 
as the marginal product of labor (
)
MPL times marginal revenue 
(
)
MR . The MRPL of the fourth hour of labor is equal to 
7
$2
$14.
×
=
 
(D)  
Incorrect. The marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  is 
defined as the marginal product of labor (
)
MPL times marginal 
revenue (
)
MR . The MRPL of the fourth hour of labor is equal to 
7
$2
$14
×
=
 (not $26). 
(E)  
Incorrect. The marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  is 
defined as the marginal product of labor (
)
MPL times marginal 
revenue (
)
MR . The MRPL of the fourth hour of labor is equal to 
7
$2
$14
×
=
 (not $70). 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 28  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
CBA-2.B 
Marginal Analysis and 
Consumer Choice 
(A)  
Incorrect. The total cost is rising with cleaning up pollution, while 
the total benefit is decreasing. Cleanup efforts should be undertaken 
as long as the marginal benefit of additional cleanup exceeds the 
marginal cost. At level 1, the marginal benefit of cleanup ($45) 
exceeds the marginal cost ($7), but at level 2, the marginal benefit of 
cleanup ($35) also exceeds the marginal cost ($30), so cleanup should 
proceed to level 2. Beginning with the third level of cleanup, the 
marginal cost ($55) exceeds the marginal benefit ($25). Thus, the 
optimal level is 2. 
(B)  
Correct. The total cost is rising with cleaning up pollution, while the 
total benefit is decreasing. Clean up efforts should be undertaken as 
long as the marginal benefit of additional cleanup exceeds the 
marginal cost. The optimal level of cleanup is 2 because the marginal 
benefit of the second cleanup ($35) exceeds the marginal cost ($30) 
Beginning with the third level of cleanup, the marginal cost ($55) 
exceeds the marginal benefit ($25). Thus, the optimal level is 2. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The total cost is rising with cleaning up pollution, while 
the total benefit is decreasing. Cleanup efforts should be undertaken 
as long as the marginal benefit of additional cleanup exceeds the 
marginal cost. The optimal level of cleanup is 2 because the marginal 
benefit of the second cleanup ($35) exceeds the marginal cost ($30) 
Beginning with the third level of cleanup the marginal cost ($55) 
exceeds the marginal benefit ($25). 
(D)  
Incorrect. The total cost is rising with cleaning up pollution, while 
the total benefit is decreasing. Cleanup efforts should be undertaken 
as long as the marginal benefit of additional cleanup exceeds the 
marginal cost. The optimal level of cleanup is 2 because the marginal 
benefit of the second cleanup ($35) exceeds the marginal cost ($30) 
Beginning with the third level of cleanup the marginal cost ($55) 
exceeds the marginal benefit ($25). 
(E)  
Incorrect. The total cost is rising with cleaning up pollution, while 
the total benefit is decreasing. Cleanup efforts should be undertaken 
as long as the marginal benefit of additional cleanup exceeds the 
marginal cost. The optimal level of cleanup is 2 because the marginal 
benefit of the second cleanup ($35) exceeds the marginal cost ($30) 
Beginning with the third level of cleanup the marginal cost ($55) 
exceeds the marginal benefit ($25). 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 29  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.A 
POL-5.A 
Inequality 
(A)  
Correct. The Lorenz curve approach typically divides the population 
into 5 equal-size groups based on income from the lowest to the 
highest and computes the income share of each 20 percent of the 
population each year on a cumulative basis. Thus, the Lorenz curve 
provides an explicit measure of the percentage of income received by 
different percentages of the population. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The Lorenz curve approach typically divides the 
population into 5 equal-size groups based on income from the lowest 
to the highest and computes the income share of each 20 percent of 
the population each year on a cumulative basis. The Lorenz curve 
shows the distribution of income, not income tax rates and income 
tax revenues. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The Lorenz curve approach typically divides the 
population into 5 equal-size groups based on income from the lowest 
to the highest and computes the income share of each 20 percent of 
the population each year on a cumulative basis. The Lorenz curve 
shows the distribution of income, not child labor rates and the 
poverty levels. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The Lorenz curve approach typically divides the 
population into 5 equal-size groups based on income from the lowest 
to the highest and computes the income share of each 20 percent of 
the population each year on a cumulative basis. The Lorenz curve 
shows the distribution of income, not income inequality and 
education level. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The Lorenz curve approach typically divides the 
population into 5 equal-size groups based on income from the lowest 
to the highest and computes the income share of each 20 percent of 
the population each year on a cumulative basis. The Lorenz curve 
shows the distribution of income, not market structure and the 
number of firms in the market. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 30  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
POL-4.A 
The Effects of 
Government 
Intervention in 
Different Market 
Structures 
(A)  
Incorrect. Antitrust laws are intended to promote competition and to 
restrain anticompetitive behavior, not to eliminate monopolies 
altogether. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Antitrust laws are intended to promote competition and to 
restrain anticompetitive behavior, not to prevent monopolies from 
generating negative externalities. 
(C)  
Correct. Antitrust laws are intended to promote competition and to 
restrain anticompetitive behavior. They do so by limiting practices 
that increase a firm’s market power through regulation. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Antitrust laws are intended to promote competition and to 
restrain anticompetitive behavior by limiting practices that increase a 
firm’s market power through regulation, not by imposing price 
ceilings. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Antitrust laws are intended to promote competition and to 
restrain anticompetitive behavior by limiting practices that increase a 
firm’s market power through regulation, not by making charging a 
price above marginal cost illegal. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 31  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
MKT-2.A 
Comparative Advantage 
and Trade 
(A)  
Incorrect. Absolute advantage refers to the productivity of resources 
between two individuals or countries in performing an activity or 
producing a good or service. It is not possible to determine absolute 
advantage from the given information. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Comparative advantage is determined by differences in 
opportunity costs in performing a particular task or producing a 
product or service. Country Y has a comparative advantage in 
producing oranges, but Country X has a comparative advantage in 
producing apples. As long as the two countries have differences in 
opportunity costs it is impossible for one country to have a 
comparative advantage in both goods. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Absolute advantage refers to the productivity of resources 
between two individuals or countries in performing an activity or 
producing a good or service. It is not possible to determine absolute 
advantage from the given information. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Country Y, not Country X, has a comparative advantage in 
producing oranges. Comparative advantage is determined by 
differences in opportunity costs in performing a particular task or 
producing a product or service. The opportunity cost of producing 1 
ton of oranges is 1 ton of apples in Country X and 0.5 ton of apples 
in Country Y. Country Y has a lower opportunity cost than Country 
X in producing oranges. Therefore, Country Y has a comparative 
advantage in producing oranges. 
(E)  
Correct. Comparative advantage is determined by differences in 
opportunity costs in performing a particular task or producing a 
product or service. The opportunity cost of producing 1 ton of apples 
is 1 ton of oranges in Country X and 2 tons of oranges in Country Y. 
Country X has a lower opportunity cost than Country Y in 
producing apples. Therefore, Country X has a comparative 
advantage in producing apples. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 32  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
3.C 
MKT-3.E 
Price Elasticity of Supply 
(A)  
Incorrect. The price elasticity of supply is defined as the percentage 
change in the quantity supplied of a good divided by the percentage 
change in the price of the good. Given the value for the elasticity and 
the percentage change in the price, the resulting percentage change 
in the quantity supplied can be determined as follows: percentage 
change in quantity supplied =  (elasticity of supply ×
 
 the percentage 
change in price) 
(
)
2
10%
20%.
=
×
=
(B)  
Incorrect. The price elasticity of supply is defined as the percentage 
change in the quantity supplied of a good divided by the percentage 
change in the price of the good. Given the value for the elasticity and 
the percentage change in the price, the resulting percentage change 
in the quantity supplied can be determined as follows: percentage 
change in quantity supplied =  (elasticity of supply × the percentage 
change in price) 
(
)
2
10%
20%.
=
×
=
 
(C)  
Incorrect. The price elasticity of supply is defined as the percentage 
change in the quantity supplied of a good divided by the percentage 
change in the price of the good. Given the value for the elasticity and 
the percentage change in the price, the resulting percentage change 
in the quantity supplied can be determined as follows: percentage 
change in quantity supplied =  (elasticity of supply × the percentage 
change in price) 
(
)
2
10%
20%.
=
×
=
 
(D)  
Incorrect. The price elasticity of supply is defined as the percentage 
change in the quantity supplied of a good divided by the percentage 
change in the price of the good. Given the value for the elasticity and 
the percentage change in the price, the resulting percentage change 
in the quantity supplied can be determined as follows: percentage 
change in quantity supplied =  (elasticity of supply ×
 
 the percentage 
change in price) 
(
)
2
10%
20%.
=
×
=
(E)  
Correct. The price elasticity of supply is defined as the percentage 
change in the quantity supplied of a good divided by the percentage 
change in the price of the good. Given the value for the elasticity and 
the percentage change in the price, the resulting percentage change 
in the quantity supplied can be determined as follows: percentage 
change in quantity supplied =  (elasticity of supply × the percentage 
change in price) 
(
)
2
10%
20%.
=
×
=
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 33  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
MKT-3.E 
Other Elasticities 
(A)  
Incorrect. The cross-price elasticity between good X and Y (
)
CRXY
can be calculated as the ratio of the percentage change in the quantity 
of good Y to the percentage change in the price of good X. Thus,
(
)
CRXY
20%/10%
2
= −
= − (not 0.5
−
). 
(B)  
Incorrect. The cross-price elasticity between good X and Y (
)
CRXY
can be calculated as the ratio of the percentage change in the quantity 
of good Y to the percentage change in the price of good X. Thus,
(
)
CRXY
20%/10%
2
= −
= − (not 2
+ ). 
(C)  
Correct. The cross-price elasticity between good X and Y (
)
CRXY
can be calculated as the ratio of the percentage change in the quantity 
of good Y to the percentage change in the price of good X. Thus,
(
)
CRXY
20%/10%
2.
= −
= −
 The cross-price elasticity between 
good X and good Y is negative implying that X and Y are 
complementary goods. 
(D)  
Incorrect. There is no information given in the question to calculate 
the income elasticity or to determine whether X and Y are normal 
goods. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The cross-price elasticity between good X and Y (
)
CRXY
can be calculated as the ratio of the percentage change in the quantity 
of good Y to the percentage change in the price of good X. Thus,
(
)
CRXY
20%/10%
2.
= −
= −
 The cross-price elasticity between 
good X and good Y is negative implying that X and Y are 
complementary goods (not substitute goods). 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 34  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
MKT-4.B 
Market Disequilibrium 
and Changes in 
Equilibrium 
(A)  
Correct. Two goods are substitutes if an increase in the price of one 
increases the demand for the other. In this situation, the increase in 
the price of strawberries will cause an increase in the demand for 
blueberries, shifting the demand curve to the right. The result will be 
a higher equilibrium price and quantity in the blueberry market. 
(B)  
Incorrect. An increase in the supply of strawberries shifts the supply 
curve to the right, resulting in a decrease in the equilibrium price 
(not an increase in the equilibrium price) and an increase in the 
quantity. 
(C)  
Incorrect. An increase in the price of farmland used to grow 
blueberries raises the cost of growing strawberries, causing a leftward 
shift of the supply curve. The result will be a higher equilibrium price 
and lower equilibrium quantity (not a higher equilibrium quantity). 
(D)  
Incorrect. A decrease in the price of blueberry harvesting equipment 
lowers the cost of producing strawberries and causes a rightward 
shift of the supply curve, resulting in a decrease in equilibrium price 
(not an increase in the equilibrium price) and an increase in 
equilibrium quantity. 
(E)  
Incorrect. An imposition of a price floor in the market for 
blueberries causes a movement along the given supply curve. If the 
price floor is binding, it will result in an increase in the quantity 
supplied and in a decrease in quantity demanded. The result will be a 
surplus of blueberries. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 35  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
CBA-2.A 
Marginal Analysis and 
Consumer Choice 
(A)  
Incorrect. Given his limited budget, Kyle should consume the 
combination of video games and comic books such that the marginal 
utility (MU) of the last dollar spent on video games is equal to the 
MU  of the last dollar spent on comic books. The MU per dollar 
spent on comic books (
)
50 / $10  is greater than the MU per dollar 
spent on video games (
)
50 / $25 .  Therefore, to maximize his utility, 
Kyle should have bought more (not fewer) comic books and fewer 
(not more) video games. 
(B)  
Correct. Given his limited budget, Kyle should consume the 
combination of video games and comic books such that the marginal 
utility (MU) of the last dollar spent on video games is equal to the 
MU  of the last dollar spent on comic books. The MU per dollar 
spent on comic books (
)
50 / $10  is greater than the MU per dollar 
spent on video games (
)
50 / $25 .  Therefore, to maximize his utility, 
Kyle should have bought more comic books and fewer video games. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Given his limited budget, Kyle should consume the 
combination of video games and comic books such that the marginal 
utility (MU) of the last dollar spent on video games is equal to the 
MU  of the last dollar spent on comic books. The MU per dollar 
spent on comic books (
)
50 / $10  is greater than the MU per dollar 
spent on video games (
)
50 / $25 .  Therefore, to maximize his utility, 
Kyle should have bought more (not fewer) comic books and fewer 
(not more) video games. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Given his limited budget, Kyle should consume the 
combination of video games and comic books such that the marginal 
utility (MU) of the last dollar spent on video games is equal to the 
MU  of the last dollar spent on comic books. The MU per dollar 
spent on comic books (
)
50 / $10  is greater than the MU per dollar 
spent on video games (
)
50 / $25 .  Therefore, to maximize his utility, 
Kyle should have bought more (not fewer) comic books and fewer 
(not more) video games. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Given his limited budget, Kyle should consume the 
combination of video games and comic books such that the marginal 
utility (MU) of the last dollar spent on video games is equal to the 
MU  of the last dollar spent on comic books. The MU per dollar 
spent on comic books (
)
50 / $10  is greater than the MU per dollar 
spent on video games (
)
50 / $25 . Therefore, to maximize his utility, 
Kyle should have bought more comic books and fewer video games 
(not more of both goods). In addition, given his limited budget, it 
would not be possible for Kyle to buy more of both goods. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 36  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing 
Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor Markets 
(A)  
Incorrect. To minimize its costs or maximize its profits, a firm should 
use the combination of labor and capital such that the last dollar spent 
on each input yields the same amount of marginal product. From the 
given data, the marginal product of the last dollar spent on labor 
(
)
8 / $40  is greater than the marginal product of the last dollar spent on 
capital (
)
10 / $100 . Therefore, the firm can produce more than 1,000 
units of output by using more labor and less capital. The firm is not 
maximizing its profit at the current output. 
(B)  
Correct. To minimize its costs, a firm should use the combination of 
labor and capital such that the marginal product of the last dollar spent 
on labor is equal to the marginal product of the last dollar spent on 
capital. From the given data, the marginal product of the last dollar 
spent on labor (
)
8 / $40  is greater than the marginal product of the last 
dollar spent on capital (
)
10 / $100 . Therefore, the firm can produce 
more than 1,000 units of output by using more labor and less capital. 
(C)  
Incorrect. To minimize its costs, a firm should use the combination of 
labor and capital such that the marginal product of the last dollar spent 
on labor is equal to the marginal product of the last dollar spent on 
capital. From the given data, the marginal product of the last dollar 
spent on labor (
)
8 / $40  is greater than the marginal product of the last 
dollar spent on capital (
)
10 / $100 . Therefore, the firm can produce 
more than 1,000 units of output by using more labor (not less labor) and 
less capital (not more capital). 
(D)  
Incorrect. To minimize its costs, a firm should use the combination of 
labor and capital such that the marginal product of the last dollar spent 
on labor is equal to the marginal product of the last dollar spent on 
capital. From the given data, the marginal product of the last dollar 
spent on labor (
)
8 / $40  is greater than the marginal product of the last 
dollar spent on capital (
)
10 / $100 . Therefore, the firm can produce 
more than 1,000 units of output by using more labor (not the same 
amount of labor) and less capital. 
(E)  
Incorrect. To minimize its costs, a firm should use the combination of 
labor and capital such that the marginal product of the last dollar spent 
on labor is equal to the marginal product of the last dollar spent on 
capital. From the given data, the marginal product of the last dollar 
spent on labor (
)
8 / $40  is greater than the marginal product of the last 
dollar spent on capital (
)
10 / $100 . Therefore, the firm can produce 
more than 1,000 units of output by using more labor (not less labor) and 
less capital (not the same amount of capital). 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 37  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-3.C 
Oligopoly and Game 
Theory 
(A)  
Incorrect. One firm having a dominant strategy does not preclude 
the other firm from having a dominant strategy. 
(B)  
Incorrect. If one firm has a dominant strategy, it does not mean the 
other firm should also have a dominant strategy. It is possible for 
both firms to have a dominant strategy, or neither firm to have a 
dominant strategy. 
(C)  
Incorrect. It is not necessarily required for both firms to have a 
dominant strategy; one, both, or neither could have a dominant 
strategy. 
(D)  
Incorrect. One firm having a dominant strategy does not preclude 
the existence of a Nash equilibrium. There will be a Nash 
equilibrium. 
(E)  
Correct. If both firms have a dominant strategy, there will 
necessarily be a Nash equilibrium. 
 
 
Question 38  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopoly 
(A)  
Incorrect. Elasticity varies moving down along the monopolist’s 
demand curve from elastic to inelastic. If the monopolist increases 
the price, its total revenue will decrease (not increase) because the 
percentage decrease in output outweighs the percentage change in 
price. Therefore, raising the price will decrease total revenue. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Reducing the output relative to the profit-maximizing 
output increases (not decreases) average total cost. 
(C)  
Incorrect. A monopolist’s marginal revenue curve lies below its 
demand curve, and price is greater than marginal revenue, not equal 
to marginal revenue. 
(D)  
Incorrect. A profit-maximizing monopolist produces output where 
marginal revenue equals marginal cost. If marginal revenue is less 
than marginal cost, the monopolist can increase output to increase 
profit. 
(E)  
Correct. Marginal revenue decreases with output but is positive in 
the elastic portion of the demand curve. That is, as price decreases, 
total revenue increases by smaller and smaller amounts and reaches a 
maximum when marginal revenue is zero and demand becomes unit 
elastic. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 39  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopoly 
(A)  
Correct. The monopolist’s profit-maximizing output is determined by 
equating marginal revenue to marginal cost. In the graph provided, 
marginal revenue equals marginal cost at 
1
Q and the price is on the 
demand curve at 
3
P . However, at 
1
Q the profit-maximizing price is less 
than both the ATC and the AVC. Therefore, the firm will minimize its 
losses by shutting down in the short run and exiting the market in the 
long run if conditions do not change. Thus, the profit-maximizing output 
in the short run is zero since the firm will shut down. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The monopolist’s profit-maximizing output is determined by 
equating marginal revenue to marginal cost. In the graph provided, 
marginal revenue equals marginal cost at 
1
Q  and the price is on the 
demand curve at 
3
P . However, at 
1
Q the profit-maximizing price is less 
than both the ATC and the AVC. Therefore, the firm will minimize its 
losses by shutting down in the short run and exiting the market in the 
long run if conditions do not change. Thus, the profit-maximizing output 
in the short run is zero, not 
1
Q ,  since the firm will shut down. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The monopolist’s profit-maximizing output is determined by 
equating marginal revenue to marginal cost. In the graph provided, 
marginal revenue equals marginal cost at 
1
Q  and the price is on the 
demand curve at 
3
P . However, at 
1
Q  the profit-maximizing price is less 
than both the ATC  and the AVC. Therefore, the firm will minimize its 
losses by shutting down in the short run and exiting the market in the 
long run if conditions do not change. Thus, the profit-maximizing output 
in the short run is zero, not 
2
Q ,  since the firm will shut down. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The monopolist’s profit-maximizing output is determined by 
equating marginal revenue to marginal cost. In the graph provided, 
marginal revenue equals marginal cost at 
1
Q  and the price is on the 
demand curve at 
3
P . However, at 
1
Q the profit-maximizing price is less 
than both the ATC  and the AVC. Therefore, the firm will minimize its 
losses by shutting down in the short run and exiting the market in the 
long run if conditions do not change. Thus, the profit-maximizing output 
in the short run is zero, not 
3
Q ,  since the firm will shut down. 
(E)  
Incorrect. There is sufficient information to determine the firm’s action in 
the short run. The monopolist’s profit-maximizing output is determined 
by equating marginal revenue to marginal cost. In the graph provided, 
marginal revenue equals marginal cost at 
1
Q and the price is on the 
demand curve at 
3
P . However, at 
1
Q the profit-maximizing price is less 
than both the ATC  and the AVC. Therefore, the firm will minimize its 
losses by shutting down in the short run and exiting the market in the 
long run if conditions do not change. Thus, the profit-maximizing output 
in the short run is zero since the firm will shut down. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 40  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopoly 
(A)  
Incorrect. Increasing the quantity produced to 
2
Q  and lowering 
price to 
2
P  adds more to the total cost than it adds to the firm’s total 
revenue. It increases the firm's losses because the firm is producing 
where MC
MR.
>
 
(B)  
Incorrect. Increasing the quantity produced to 
3
Q  and price to 
4
P  is 
not plausible; the price that is consistent with 
3
Q  occurs on the 
demand curve between 
2
P  and 1P . In addition, the firm is producing 
where MC
MR,
>
 making its losses bigger. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Producing 
1
Q  and setting price equal to marginal revenue 
will widen the loss because it reduces total revenue without any 
reduction in the cost of production. Additionally, setting the price 
equal to marginal cost is not on the demand curve and not consistent 
with 
1
Q . 
(D)  
Correct. In the graph provided, marginal revenue equals marginal 
cost at 
1
Q  and the price is on the demand curve at 
3
P . However, at 
1
Q  the profit-maximizing price is less than both the ATC  and the 
AVC. Therefore, the firm will minimize its losses by shutting down 
in the short run and exiting the market in the long run if conditions 
do not change. 
(E)  
Incorrect. There is no economic reason to build a larger plant given 
the market conditions, and firms do not build a larger plant to 
achieve decreasing returns to scale. The firm will minimize its losses 
by shutting down in the short run and exiting the market in the long 
run if conditions do not change. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 41  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
CBA-2.D 
Profit Maximization 
(A)  
Incorrect. The firm is producing where marginal cost is greater than 
marginal revenue and therefore is not maximizing profit. To 
maximize profit, the firm should reduce its output to where marginal 
revenue equals marginal cost. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The firm’s profit will decrease (rather than increase) by 
increasing the quantity sold because each additional output adds 
more to the firm’s cost than it does to the firm’s revenue. 
(C)  
Correct. The firm is producing where marginal cost is greater than 
marginal revenue. Profit is maximized when marginal revenue equals 
marginal cost, so the firm will increase its profits by decreasing 
output to where marginal revenue equals marginal cost. 
(D)  
Incorrect. It is not possible to determine the type of profit the firm is 
currently earning without knowing its average total cost. 
(E)  
Incorrect. It is not possible to determine whether the firm’s 
accounting profit is positive, negative, or zero without knowing its 
average total cost (or explicit and implicit costs). 
 
 
Question 42  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-4.D 
Monopsonistic Markets 
(A)  
Incorrect. In a monopsonistic labor market when the firm hires 
additional workers, the marginal factor (resource) cost is greater 
than the supply price of labor. Therefore, the supply curve is 
upward-sloping, not horizontal. 
(B)  
Incorrect. In a monopsonistic labor market when the firm hires 
additional workers, the marginal factor (resource) cost is greater 
than the supply price of labor. Therefore, the marginal factor cost 
curve is upward-sloping and lies above the supply curve; it is not the 
same as the supply curve for labor. 
(C)  
Incorrect. At its optimal level of employment, the firm pays a wage 
rate lower (not higher) than the competitive market wage rate. 
(D)  
Incorrect. In a monopsonistic labor market, the imposition of a 
minimum wage may result in larger, smaller, or the same 
employment as in the competitive market. 
(E)  
Correct. In a monopsonistic labor market when the firm hires 
additional workers, the marginal factor (resource) cost is greater 
than the supply price of labor. Therefore, the marginal factor cost 
curve is upward-sloping and lies above the labor supply curve. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 43  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing 
Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor 
Markets 
(A)  
Incorrect. A firm hires labor in a perfectly competitive labor market 
as long as the marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  is greater 
than the marginal factor cost (
)
MFC ,  which is the same as the 
market wage. It is the MRPL, not the total product, that is relevant 
to the firm’s profit-maximizing decisions. 
(B)  
Incorrect. A firm hires labor in a perfectly competitive labor market 
as long as the marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  is greater 
than the marginal factor cost  (
)
MFC ,  which is the same as the 
market wage. It is the marginal revenue product of labor, not the 
average product, that is relevant to the firm’s profit-maximizing 
decisions. 
(C)  
Incorrect. When the marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  is 
less than the marginal factor cost (MFC, which is the same as the 
market wage), the firm is not using the profit-maximizing quantity of 
labor. It can increase profit by hiring additional workers until the 
MRPL
MFC.
=
 
(D)  
Incorrect. When the marginal revenue product of labor (
)
MRPL  is 
greater than the marginal factor cost (MFC, which is the same as the 
market wage), the firm is not using the profit-maximizing quantity of 
labor. It can increase profit by hiring fewer workers until the 
MRPL
MFC.
=
 
(E)  
Correct. When the marginal revenue product of labor is equal to the 
marginal factor cost (which is the same as the market wage), the firm 
is using the profit-maximizing quantity of labor, and profit is 
maximized. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 44  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
POL-3.A 
Externalities 
(A)  
Incorrect. In the presence of negative externalities (e.g., pollution), 
the marginal social cost exceeds the marginal private cost, and the 
marginal social benefit is less than the marginal social cost. 
(B)  
Incorrect. In the presence of negative externalities (e.g., pollution), 
the marginal social cost exceeds the marginal private cost, and the 
marginal social benefit is equal to the marginal private cost. 
(C)  
Correct. In the presence of negative externalities (e.g., pollution), the 
marginal social cost exceeds the marginal private cost, and the 
marginal social benefit is less than the marginal social cost. 
(D)  
Incorrect. In the presence of negative externalities (e.g., pollution), 
the marginal social cost exceeds the marginal private cost, but the 
marginal social benefit is equal to the marginal private benefit. 
(E)  
Incorrect. In the presence of negative externalities (e.g., pollution), 
the total social cost is greater than (not less than) the total social 
benefit. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 45  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
POL-3.C 
Public and Private 
Goods 
(A)  
Incorrect. When goods are nonrival and nonexcludable in 
consumption, it is difficult to exclude nonpayers, leading to 
underproduction of such goods relative to the socially optimal 
quantity. Less than (rather than more than) the socially optimal 
quantity is produced and consumed. 
(B)  
Incorrect. When goods are nonrival and nonexcludable in 
consumption, it is difficult to exclude nonpayers, leading to 
underproduction of such goods relative to the socially optimal 
quantity. Less than the socially optimal quantity is produced and 
consumed. 
(C)  
Correct. When goods are nonrival and nonexcludable in 
consumption, it is difficult to exclude nonpayers, leading to 
underproduction of such goods relative to the socially optimal 
quantity. 
(D)  
Incorrect. When goods are nonrival and nonexcludable in 
consumption it is difficult to exclude nonpayers, leading to 
underproduction of such goods relative to the socially optimal 
quantity. Thus, there is underproduction, not a surplus of such 
goods. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Nonrival and nonexcludable goods yield consumer 
surplus. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 46  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.A 
MKT-3.A 
Demand 
(A)  
Incorrect. People are primarily motivated to pursue their self-interest 
rather than societal goals. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Individual private property rights provide people 
incentives to use available resources to produce goods and services 
that will allow them to profit by selling their goods and services to 
consumers who value them. Goods and services are produced to 
satisfy demand as reflected by the willingness to pay. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Individual private property rights provide people 
incentives to use available resources to produce goods and services 
that will allow them to profit by selling their goods and services to 
consumers who value them. However, competitive markets do not 
necessarily achieve an equitable distribution of goods and services. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Rational individuals pay attention to both costs and 
benefits in making economic decisions, not only to benefits. 
(E)  
Correct. Individual private property rights provide people incentives 
to use available resources to produce goods and services that will 
allow them to profit by selling their goods and services to consumers 
who value them. Market prices provide the incentive and the signal 
regarding what is valued. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 47  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
MKT-4.B 
Market Disequilibrium 
and Changes in 
Equilibrium 
(A)  
Incorrect. A decrease in the supply of coffee will shift the supply 
curve for coffee to the left and raise the equilibrium price for coffee. 
Since coffee is an input for brewed coffee, the increase in the price of 
coffee will increase the cost of making brewed coffee and cause a 
decrease in the supply of brewed coffee, raising the price and 
decreasing the quantity. Since disposable cups are an input for 
serving brewed coffee, their demand will decrease, resulting in a 
decrease (not an increase) in the price of disposable coffee cups. 
(B)  
Incorrect. A decrease in the number of locations serving brewed 
coffee will result in a decrease in the supply of brewed coffee, raising 
the equilibrium price and decreasing the equilibrium quantity. This 
will decrease the demand for disposable cups and lowers (not 
increase) their price. 
(C)  
Incorrect. An increase in the supply of disposable coffee cups will 
result in a decrease in the equilibrium price, not an increase. 
(D)  
Correct. An increase in the demand for brewed coffee will shift the 
demand curve for disposable coffee cups to the right, resulting in a 
higher equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity of disposable 
coffee cups. 
(E)  
Incorrect. An increase in the price of tea, a complement for coffee, 
will cause a decrease in the demand for coffee, resulting in a lower 
price for coffee. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 48  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
3.A 
POL-1.A 
The Effects of 
Government 
Intervention in Markets 
(A)  
Incorrect. The price floor raises the price above the equilibrium price 
of $20, reducing the quantity demanded while supply remains 
constant. The result will be a surplus (not a shortage) of the good in 
the market. 
(B)  
Correct. The price floor raises the price above the equilibrium price 
of $20, reducing the quantity demanded while supply remains 
constant. The quantity demanded will fall, but the quantity supplied 
will not change. The market will not achieve equilibrium, resulting in 
a decrease in both the consumer and producer surpluses. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The equilibrium price of the good with the price floor will 
increase (not decrease). The quantity sold of the good to consumers 
will decrease because the price floor will cause a decrease in quantity 
demanded. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The equilibrium price of the good with the price floor will 
increase, and the quantity sold of the good to consumers will 
decrease (not remain unchanged) because the price floor will cause a 
decrease in quantity demanded. 
(E)  
Incorrect. As a result of the price floor, demand for substitutes for 
the good will increase (not decrease), as consumers try to substitute 
the higher-priced good with lower-priced substitutes. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 49  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
3.C 
MKT-3.A 
Demand 
(A)  
Incorrect. At $12, Adey buys 2 units and Sarah buys 0 units for a 
total quantity of 2 units in the market. At $6, Adey buys 5 units and 
Sarah buys 3 units for a total market quantity of 8 units. Thus, when 
the price decreases from $12 to $6, the quantity demanded along the 
market demand curve increases from 2 to 8 units (not from 2 to 4 
units). 
(B)  
Incorrect. At $12, Adey buys 2 units and Sarah buys 0 units for  
a total quantity of 2 units in the market. At $6, Adey buys 5 units  
and Sarah buys 3 units for a total market quantity of 8 units.  
Thus, when the price decreases from $12 to $6, the quantity 
demanded along the market demand curve increases from  
2 to 8 units (not from 2 to 5 units). 
(C)  
Correct. At $12, Adey buys 2 units and Sarah buys 0 units for a total 
quantity of 2 units in the market. At $6, Adey buys 5 units and Sarah 
buys 3 units for a total market quantity of 8 units. Thus, when the 
price decreases from $12 to $6, the quantity demanded along the 
market demand curve increases from 2 to 8 units. 
(D)  
Incorrect. At $12, Adey buys 2 units and Sarah buys 0 units for  
a total quantity of 2 units in the market. At $6, Adey buys 5 units  
and Sarah buys 3 units for a total market quantity of 8  units.  
Thus, when the price decreases from $12 to $6, the quantity 
demanded along the market demand curve increases from  
2 to 8 units (not from 0 to 14 units). 
(E)  
Incorrect. At $12, Adey buys 2 units and Sarah buys 0 units for  
a total quantity of 2 units in the market. At $6, Adey buys 5 units  
and Sarah buys 3 units for a total market quantity of 8 units.  
Thus, when the price decreases from $12 to $6, the quantity 
demanded along the market demand curve increases from  
2 to 8 units (not from 8 to 14 units). 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 50  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-1.A 
The Production 
Function 
(A)  
Incorrect. The marginal product of labor can be negative with an 
overuse of labor, but the average product of labor will never be 
negative. 
(B)  
Incorrect. When marginal product is rising, the average product is 
also rising, but it is less than the marginal product. 
(C)  
Incorrect. When the average product of labor is rising, the marginal 
product of labor may be rising or falling. 
(D)  
Correct. When the average product of labor is rising, the marginal 
product is above it, pulling the average up. When the marginal is 
below the average product, the average product is falling because the 
marginal product is pulling it down. The average product is at its 
maximum when the marginal product equals the average product. 
Therefore, if the average product of labor is falling, the marginal 
product of labor must be less than the average product of labor. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The marginal product curve crosses the average product 
curve at its highest point; thus, the two are equal at that point. 
 
Question 51  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-2.A 
Firms' Short-Run 
Decisions to Produce 
and Long-Run 
Decisions to Enter or 
Exit a Market 
(A)  
Incorrect. A firm’s (May’s) short-run supply curve is the portion of 
the marginal cost curve that lies above the minimum AVC.On the 
graph that is line segment STV, not TW. 
(B)  
Incorrect. A firm’s (May’s) short-run supply curve is the portion of 
the marginal cost curve that lies above the minimum AVC.On the 
graph that is line segment STV,  not RST. 
(C)  
Correct. A firm’s (May’s) short-run supply curve is the portion of 
the marginal cost curve that lies above the minimum AVC . On the 
graph that is line segment STV. 
(D)  
Incorrect. A firm’s (May’s) short-run supply curve is the portion of 
the marginal cost curve that lies above the minimum AVC.On the 
graph that is line segment STV,  not STW. 
(E)  
Incorrect. A firm’s (May’s) short-run supply curve is the portion of 
the marginal cost curve that lies above the minimum AVC.On the 
graph that is line segment STV,  not RSTV. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 52  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-3.A 
Perfect Competition 
(A)  
Incorrect. Firms are price takers because each firm’s output is a very 
small percentage of the total market and its output decision will not 
influence the market price. This is not the characteristic that causes 
firms to earn zero economic profit in the long run. The key 
assumption that leads to long-run adjustment in perfectly 
competitive markets is the assumption of no barriers to entry or exit. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Producing identical products simply implies that the 
firms’ products are perfect substitutes and individual firms are price 
takers. This is not the reason for zero economic profit in the long 
run. The key assumption that leads to long-run adjustment in 
perfectly competitive markets is the assumption of no barriers to 
entry or exit. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The response describes why firms are price takers, not why 
they earn zero economic profits in the long run. The key assumption 
that leads to long-run adjustment in perfectly competitive markets is 
the assumption of no barriers to entry or exit. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The horizontal industry supply curve indicates that the 
industry is a constant cost industry. It does not explain why firms 
earn zero economic profits in the long run. The key assumption that 
leads to long-run adjustment in perfectly competitive markets is the 
assumption of no barriers to entry or exit. 
(E)  
Correct. The key assumption that leads to long-run adjustment in 
perfectly competitive markets is the assumption of no barriers to 
entry or exit (easy entry or exit). Depending on the market condition 
in the short run, firms respond by entering the market if economic 
profits are positive and exiting the market if economic profits are 
negative. The entry or exit of firms will stop when each firm earns 
zero economic profit. That means no firm has an incentive to leave 
the market or enter the market. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 53  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
3.A 
PRD-3.A 
Perfect Competition 
(A)  
Incorrect. The positive economic profits will attract new firms to 
enter the market. The entry of new firms will increase supply and 
decrease the price (not increase the price). The price will continue to 
fall until it is equal to minimum average total cost for each firm and 
economic profits are eliminated. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The positive economic profits will attract new firms to 
enter the market. The entry of new firms increases (not decreases) 
the number of firms in the market, which increases supply and 
decreases (not increases) the price. The price will continue to fall 
until it is equal to minimum average total cost for each firm and 
economic profits are eliminated. 
(C)  
Correct. The positive economic profits will attract new firms to enter 
the market. The entry of new firms increases the number of firms, 
which increases supply and decreases the price. The price will 
continue to fall until it is equal to minimum average total cost for 
each firm and economic profits are eliminated. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The positive economic profits will attract new firms to 
enter the market. The entry of new firms increases (not decreases) 
the number of firms, which increases supply and decreases the price. 
The price will continue to fall until it is equal to minimum average 
total cost for each firm and economic profits are eliminated. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The positive economic profits will attract new firms to 
enter the market. The entry of new firms increases the number of 
firms, which increases supply and decreases the price. The price will 
continue to fall until it is equal to minimum average total cost for 
each firm and economic profits are eliminated. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 54  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.C 
CBA-2.C 
Types of Profit 
(A)  
Incorrect. The $30,000 is Jamal’s accounting profit, but his economic 
profit is negative when all the implicit costs are deducted from the 
accounting profit. Economic profit is calculated as the difference 
between total revenue minus both explicit and implicit costs.  
Given the data above, Jamal’s economic profit is 
(
)
$60,000
$30,0000
$30,000
$12,000
$2,000
$14,000.
−
−
−
−
= −
 
(B)  
Incorrect. Economic profit is calculated as the difference between 
total revenue minus both explicit and implicit costs. Given the data 
above, Jamal’s economic profit is  
(
)
$60,000
$30,0000
$30,000
$12,000
$2,000
$14,000.
−
−
−
−
= −
 
(C)  
Incorrect. Economic profit is calculated as the difference between 
total revenue minus both explicit and implicit costs. Given the data 
above, Jamal’s economic profit is  
(
)
$60,000
$30,0000
$30,000
$12,000
$2,000
$14,000.
−
−
−
−
= −
 
(D)  
Incorrect. Economic profit is calculated as the difference between 
total revenue minus both explicit and implicit costs. Given the data 
above, Jamal’s economic profit is  
(
)
$60,000
$30,0000
$30,000
$12,000
$2,000
$14,000.
−
−
−
−
= −
 
(E)  
Correct. Economic profit is calculated as the difference between total 
revenue minus both explicit and implicit costs. Given the data above, 
Jamal’s economic profit is  
(
)
$60,000
$30,0000
$30,000
$12,000
$2,000
$14,000.
−
−
−
−
= −
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 55  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopolistic 
Competition 
(A)  
Correct. In long-run equilibrium, firms produce the profit-
maximizing quantity by equating marginal cost to marginal revenue. 
The price set is greater than marginal cost, creating deadweight loss. 
Therefore, monopolistically competitive firms are not allocatively 
efficient. 
(B)  
Incorrect. At the profit-maximizing quantity, marginal cost is not 
greater than minimum average total cost. Monopolistically 
competitive firms are allocatively inefficient because price is greater 
than marginal cost, not because marginal cost is greater than 
minimum average total cost. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Firms do not maximize profit by producing where 
marginal revenue is greater than marginal cost. Monopolistically 
competitive firms are allocatively inefficient because price is greater 
than marginal cost, not because they produce where marginal 
revenue is greater than marginal cost. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Firms produce where marginal revenue equals marginal 
cost to maximize profit. There is no overallocation of resources. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Firms in monopolistic competition produce differentiated, 
not homogenous, products. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 56  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.C 
PRD-3.A 
Perfect Competition 
(A)  
Incorrect. The firm is currently producing where marginal cost ($7) 
is greater than marginal revenue (which is equal to price, $5).  
The firm can increase profit by decreasing output (not increasing 
output) to where marginal cost equals price, not to where price 
equals average total cost. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The firm is currently producing where marginal cost ($7) 
is greater than marginal revenue (which is equal to price, $5).  
The firm can increase profit by decreasing output (not increasing 
output) to where marginal cost equals price. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The firm is currently producing where marginal cost ($7) 
is greater than marginal revenue (which is equal to price, $5).  
The firm can increase profit by decreasing output, (not by keeping 
output at its current level) to where marginal cost equals price. 
(D)  
Correct. The firm is currently producing where marginal cost ($7) 
 is greater than marginal revenue (which is equal to price, $5).  
The firm can increase profit by decreasing output to where marginal 
cost equals price. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The firm is currently producing where marginal cost ($7) 
is greater than marginal revenue (which is equal to price, $5).  
The firm can increase profit by decreasing output to where marginal 
cost equals price, not to where price is equal to average total cost. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 57  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
POL-5.B 
Inequality 
(A)  
Incorrect. Both accountants and teachers require academic training 
and education to practice. Both have identical marginal revenue 
schedules. Therefore, the difference in earnings cannot be explained 
by the differences in human capital. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Earning differentials are not based on differences in 
opportunity cost. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Whether or not the job provides a pleasant work 
environment does not explain why accountants earn more than 
school teachers. 
(D)  
Correct. If the supply of accountants is low relative to the supply of 
teachers, accountants will receive higher starting salaries than school 
teachers. 
(E)  
Incorrect. If fewer school teachers graduate each year than 
accountants, that will imply teachers’ salaries will be higher (not 
lower) than accountants’ salaries. 
 
Question 58  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
3.A 
PRD-4.B 
Changes in Factor 
Demand and Factor 
Supply 
(A)  
Correct. An increase in the number of older people in a country will 
increase the demand for healthcare workers. 
(B)  
Incorrect. An increase in the number of older people in a country 
will increase the demand for healthcare workers, which will increase 
the wages of the healthcare workers. An increase in wages means that 
the marginal factor cost will increase, not decrease. 
(C)  
Incorrect. An increase in the number of older people in a country 
will increase the demand for healthcare workers. As the demand for 
healthcare workers increases along the supply curve, the wages of the 
healthcare workers will increase and the quantity of healthcare 
workers supplied will increase, not decrease. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The quality of healthcare services cannot be determined 
from the given information. 
(E)  
Incorrect. An increase in the number of older people in a country 
will increase the demand for healthcare workers, which will increase 
(not decrease) the wages of the healthcare workers. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 59  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
2.A 
POL-4.A 
The Effects of 
Government 
Intervention in 
Different Market 
Structures 
(A)  
Incorrect. If City Cable operates as a natural monopoly, setting price 
equal to marginal cost will make it operate at a loss. In order for City 
Cable to earn zero economic profit, the government should set its 
price equal to average total cost. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The marginal revenue is less than the demand curve, and 
setting price equal to marginal revenue would lead City Cable to 
operate at a loss. In order for City Cable to earn zero economic 
profit, the government should set its price equal to average total cost. 
(C)  
Correct. If the price is equal to average total cost, City Cable will 
earn zero economic profit. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Setting price equal to average variable cost will be a price 
below average total cost, and therefore, City Cable will operate at a 
loss. In order for City Cable to earn zero economic profit, the 
government should set its price equal to average total cost. 
(E)  
Incorrect. To set price equal to total cost is not feasible; price will 
exceed all per-unit costs to the level where no quantity will be 
purchased. In order for City Cable to earn zero economic profit, the 
government should set its price equal to average total cost. 
 
 
Question 60  
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
1.A 
POL-5.B 
Inequality 
(A)  
Incorrect. A progressive income tax is characterized by a lower (not 
higher) average tax rate at low income levels than at high income 
levels. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Progressive income tax rates are not dependent on total 
tax revenues. 
(C)  
Incorrect. A progressive income tax is by definition one in which 
marginal tax rates increase as income increases, and vice versa. 
(D)  
Correct. A progressive income tax is by definition one in which 
marginal tax rates increase as income increases, and vice versa. 
(E)  
Incorrect. A progressive income tax is by definition one in which 
marginal tax rates increase (not decrease) as income increases, and 
vice versa. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 • 
 
 
 
 
o
o
o
o
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
AP®  MICROECONOMICS 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 1 
9 Points (1, 5, 1, 2)  
(a) 1 Point 
One point is earned for describing any of the following conditions that distinguish a natural monopoly 
from a typical monopoly. 
The firm has decreasing average total cost over the entire range of market demand. 
The firm experiences economies of scale over the entire range of market demand. 
The firm has a marginal cost curve that is constant or decreases over the entire range  
of market demand. 
The firm’s average total cost decreases everywhere. 
(b) 5 points 
T
he figure presents a graph of a natural monopoly in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled “Quantity,” and the vertical axis is labeled “Price, Cost.” There is a quantity on the horizontal axis labeled Q sub M, which lies about one third of the way along the horizontal axis. There is a price on the vertical axis labeled P sub M, which lies about two thirds of the way up the vertical axis. There are four curves on the graph that are labeled D, M R, A T C, and M C. Curve D begins on the vertical axis near the top of the graph, and moves downward and to the right in a straight line. It passes through the point with coordinates Q sub M comma P sub M. It ends near the end of, and just above, the horizontal axis. Curve M R begins where curve D begins on the vertical axis, and moves more steeply downward and to the right in a straight line. It crosses the horizontal axis, and ends to the right of quantity Q sub M and slightly below the horizontal axis. Curve A T C begins just to the left of curve M R, and above price P sub M, and steeply moves downward and to the right. It intersects curve M R, then begins to move more slowly, and intersects curve D. Curve A T C ends directly above where curve D ends. Curve M C begins just above price P sub M and slightly to the left of where curve A T C begins. It steeply moves downward and to the right and intersects curve M R directly above quantity Q sub M. It then begins to move downward and to the right more slowly, intersects curve D, and ends between where curves A T C and D end. There are two grid lines on the graph. From quantity Q sub M on the horizontal axis, a vertical grid line moves upward, passes through the intersection of curves M R and M C, crosses curve A T C, and ends at curve D. From price P sub M on the vertical axis, a horizontal grid line moves to the right, passes through the M C, A T C, and M R curves, and ends at curve D at the same point where the vertical grid line coming from quantity Q sub M on the horizontal axis ends. A rectangle between the vertical axis and quantity Q sub M is shaded gray. The left side of the rectangle is the portion of the vertical axis from price P sub M down to the horizontal grid line below price P sub M. The top side of the rectangle is the portion of the horizontal grid line at P sub M from the vertical axis to quantity Q sub M. The right side of the rectangle is the portion of the vertical grid line at Q sub M from price P sub M down to the horizontal grid line below P sub M. The bottom side of the rectangle is the portion of the horizontal grid line below P sub M from the vertical axis to quantity Q sub M. The shaded rectangle is labeled “Economic Profit.”
One point is earned for drawing a correctly labeled graph showing downward-sloping demand (D)  
and marginal revenue  M R curves with the  M R curve below the demand curve. 
One point is earned for showing the profit-maximizing quantity, labeled  Q sub M , where 
 
M R equals M C . 
One point is earned for showing the profit-maximizing price, labeled  P sub M , from the demand curve at  Q sub M . 
One point is earned for showing the downward sloping or horizontal marginal cost  M C curve below 
the downward sloping average total cost  A T C curve, over the entire range of demand. 
One point is earned for completely shading the correct area of economic profit. 
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 • 
 
 
 
• 
• 
 
 
 
AP® MICROECONOMICS 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 1 (continued) 
c) 1 Point 
One point is earned for showing the maximum quantity on the graph from part (b) that would allow  L and P 
to earn zero economic profits, labeled  Q sub R , and the price, labeled  P sub R , where the average total cost curve 
crosses the demand curve  P sub R, equals A T C, which equals D . 
(d) 2 Points 
One point is earned for stating that  L and P does not earn positive economic profit at the allocatively 
efficient quantity and for explaining that the price at which the  M C curve intersects the demand curve 
is less than the average total cost and therefore the firm is incurring a loss. 
One point is earned for stating that  L and P will need to be subsidized by the government. 
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 • 
 
 • 
 
 • 
 
 
 
 • 
 
 • 
 
 
AP® MICROECONOMICS 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 2 
5 points (1,1,1,1,1)  
(a) 1 point: 
One point is earned for stating that the quantity demanded will decrease by 8.5%. 
(b) 1 point: 
One point is earned for explaining that consumers have more substitutes for the good in the long run 
that are not available in the short run or there is more time to adjust in the long run. 
(c) 1 point: 
One point is earned for stating that total revenue will decrease, and for explaining that demand  
is more elastic in the long run  (3.2 is greater than 1) so the percentage decrease in quantity will be larger than 
the percentage increase in price. 
(d) 1 point: 
One point is earned for stating that movie tickets are a normal good and for explaining that  
a normal good is a good with a positive income elasticity of demand  (0.75 is greater than 0) . 
(e) 1 point: 
One point is earned for drawing a correctly-labeled graph showing a leftward shift of the  
demand curve. 
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 
T
he figure presents a graph of two demand curves in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane titled “Market for Good X.” The horizontal axis is labeled “Quantity,” and the vertical axis is labeled “Price.” There are two curves in the graph that are labeled D and D sub 1. Curve D begins near the top of the graph and to the right of the vertical axis. It moves downward and to the right in a straight line, and ends near the end of the horizontal axis and above the horizontal axis. Curve D sub 1 begins just to the right of the vertical axis and below where curve D begins. Curve D sub 1 moves downward and to the right in a straight line, parallel to curve D, and ends above the horizontal axis, and to the left of where curve D ends. There is an arrow in between the two curves that points to the left from curve D to curve D sub 1.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
 
 
 
• 
• 
 
 • 
AP® MICROECONOMICS 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 3 
5 Points (2, 2, 1) 
(a) 2 points 
The figure presents a graph of demand and supply in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled “Quantity,” and the vertical axis is labeled “Price.” From left to right, there are two quantities on the horizontal axis that are labeled Q asterisk and Q sub p. Quantity Q asterisk lies about three eighths of the way along the horizontal axis. Quantity Q sub p lies about five eighths of the way along the horizontal axis. From top to bottom, there are two prices on the vertical axis that are labeled $20 and $10. $10 lies about halfway up the vertical axis. $20 lies about three fourths of the way up the vertical axis. There are two curves on the graph that are labeled D and S. Curve D begins on the vertical axis, at the top of the graph, and moves downward and to the right in a straight line. It passes through the point with coordinates Q asterisk comma $10, and ends just to the right of quantity Q sub p and just above the horizontal axis. Curve S begins on the vertical axis, slightly above the horizontal axis, and moves upward and to the right in a straight line. It intersects curve D at the point with coordinates Q asterisk comma $10 and passes through the point with coordinates Q sub p comma $20. Curve S ends to the right of quantity Q sub p, near the top of the graph. There are four grid lines on the graph. From quantity Q asterisk on the horizontal axis, a vertical grid line moves upward and hits the intersection of curves D and S. From quantity Q sub p on the horizontal axis, a vertical grid line moves upward, crosses curve D, and ends at curve S, high above the horizontal axis. From $10 on the vertical axis, a horizontal grid line moves to the right and hits the intersection of curves D and S at quantity Q asterisk. From $20 on the vertical axis, a horizontal grid line moves to the right, crosses curve D, and ends at curve S at quantity Q sub p. There are two shaded triangles on the graph that are labeled C S and P S. Triangle C S lies between the vertical axis and where curve D intersects with the horizontal grid line at $20. The left side of the triangle is the portion of the vertical axis from where curve D begins down to $20. The bottom side of the triangle is the portion of the horizontal grid line at $20 from the vertical axis to curve D. The slanted side of the triangle is the portion of curve D from where it begins to where curve D intersects the horizontal grid line at $20. Triangle P S lies between the vertical axis and quantity Q asterisk. The left side of the triangle is the portion of the vertical axis from $10 down to where curve S begins. The top side of the triangle is the portion of the horizontal grid line at $10 from the vertical axis to the intersection of curves D and S. The slanted side of the triangle is the portion of curve S from where it begins to the intersection of curves D and S.
One point is earned drawing a correctly labeled graph of the market for wheat and for showing  
the equilibrium price at $10 and the equilibrium quantity, labeled  Q asterisk . 
One point is earned for completely shading the correct area of producer surplus and labeling it  P S . 
(b) 2 points  
One point is earned for showing the world price of a bushel of wheat on the graph at $20 and  
for showing the quantity of wheat produced domestically, labeled  Q sub p , from original supply curve.  
One point is earned for completely shading the correct area of consumer surplus and labeling  
it  C S . 
(c) 1 point  
One point is earned for stating that the domestic consumer surplus decreases and the domestic 
producer surplus increases.  
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2019 AP Microeconomics Scoring Worksheet 
Section I: Multiple Choice 
Number Correct (
out of sixty) ti
mes one point zero zero ze
r
o zero equal
s Weighted Section I Score (Do not round)
Section II: Free Response 
Question 1 Blank
 (out of nine) 
times one p
oint six six six six equals Blank (do not round)
Question 2  
Blank (out of fi
ve) times o
ne point five zero zero zero equals Blank (do not round)
Question 3 B
lank (out of fiv
e) times on
e point five zero zero zero equals Blank (do not round)
Sum equa
ls Weighte
d Section I
I Scor
e (Do not round)
Composite Score 
Weigh
ted S
ection I 
Score plu
s Weighted Section
 II Score equals
 Composite Score 
(Round to nearest wh
ole number)
AP Score Conversion Chart 
Microeconomics 
Composite 
Score Range 
AP Score 
66-90
5 
51-65
4 
41-50
3 
32-40
2 
0-31
1 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2019 AP Microeconomics 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Multiple-Choice Questions 
Question 
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
Key 
% Correct 
1 
1.A 
MKT-1.B 
Resource Allocation and Economic Systems 
A 
73 
2 
2.C 
MKT-1.C 
Production Possibilities Curve 
D 
67 
3 
2.A 
MKT-4.B 
Market Disequilibrium and Changes  
in Equilibrium 
E 
75 
4 
2.A 
MKT-3.D 
Supply 
D 
76 
5 
3.A 
MKT-3.E 
Price Elasticity of Demand 
E 
52 
6 
2.A 
CBA-2.A 
Marginal Analysis and Consumer Choice 
E 
59 
7 
1.A 
CBA-2.B 
Marginal Analysis and Consumer Choice 
E 
13 
8 
1.A 
MKT-4.A 
Market Equilibrium and Consumer  
and Producer Surplus 
C 
77 
9 
2.C 
PRD-1.A 
Short-Run Production Costs 
A 
51 
10 
2.A 
PRD-3.A 
Perfect Competition 
D 
73 
11 
2.C 
PRD-1.A 
Long-Run Production Costs 
D 
70 
12 
1.C 
PRD-3.C 
Oligopoly and Game Theory 
D 
81 
13 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopolistic Competition 
B 
52 
14 
2.C 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor Markets 
A 
22 
15 
3.A 
POL-3.A 
Externalities 
C 
36 
16 
1.A 
MKT-1.C 
Production Possibilities Curve 
A 
84 
17 
3.C 
POL-1.A 
The Effects of Government Intervention  
in Markets 
B 
73 
18 
2.C 
PRD-1.A 
Short-Run Production Costs 
A 
37 
19 
3.A 
MKT-3.A 
Demand 
E 
54 
20 
2.C 
PRD-1.A 
The Production Function 
B 
79 
21 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopoly 
C 
71 
22 
1.C 
PRD-3.C 
Oligopoly and Game Theory 
C 
73 
23 
1.A 
PRD-3.B 
Price Discrimination 
A 
78 
24 
2.C 
PRD-2.A 
Firms' Short-Run Decisions to Produce and 
Long-Run Decisions to Enter or Exit a Market 
A 
57 
25 
1.C 
PRD-1.A 
The Production Function 
D 
92 
26 
2.C 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor Markets 
E 
39 
27 
1.C 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor Markets 
C 
59 
28 
2.C 
CBA-2.B 
Marginal Analysis and Consumer Choice 
B 
39 
29 
1.A 
POL-5.A 
Inequality 
A 
60 
30 
2.A 
POL-4.A 
The Effects of Government Intervention  
in Different Market Structures 
C 
47 
31 
2.C 
MKT-2.A 
Comparative Advantage and Trade 
E 
66 
32 
3.C 
MKT-3.E 
Price Elasticity of Supply 
E 
54 
33 
2.C 
MKT-3.E 
Other Elasticities 
C 
59 
34 
2.A 
MKT-4.B 
Market Disequilibrium and Changes  
in Equilibrium 
A 
61 
35 
2.C 
CBA-2.A 
Marginal Analysis and Consumer Choice 
B 
81 
36 
2.C 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor Markets 
B 
44 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2019 AP Microeconomics 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Question 
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
Key 
% Correct 
37 
2.A 
PRD-3.C 
Oligopoly and Game Theory 
E 
68 
38 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopoly 
E 
48 
39 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopoly 
A 
21 
40 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopoly 
D 
64 
41 
2.C 
CBA-2.D 
Profit Maximization 
C 
39 
42 
2.A 
PRD-4.D 
Monopsonistic Markets 
E 
39 
43 
2.A 
PRD-4.C 
Profit-Maximizing Behavior in Perfectly 
Competitive Factor Markets 
E 
71 
44 
2.A 
POL-3.A 
Externalities 
C 
66 
45 
2.A 
POL-3.C 
Public and Private Goods 
C 
67 
46 
1.A 
MKT-3.A 
Demand 
E 
47 
47 
2.A 
MKT-4.B 
Market Disequilibrium and Changes  
in Equilibrium 
D 
60 
48 
3.A 
POL-1.A 
The Effects of Government Intervention  
in Markets 
B 
44 
49 
3.C 
MKT-3.A 
Demand 
C 
57 
50 
2.A 
PRD-1.A 
The Production Function 
D 
33 
51 
2.A 
PRD-2.A 
Firms' Short-Run Decisions to Produce and 
Long-Run Decisions to Enter or Exit a Market 
C 
43 
52 
2.A 
PRD-3.A 
Perfect Competition 
E 
45 
53 
3.A 
PRD-3.A 
Perfect Competition 
C 
78 
54 
1.C 
CBA-2.C 
Types of Profit 
E 
38 
55 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopolistic Competition 
A 
48 
56 
2.C 
PRD-3.A 
Perfect Competition 
D 
39 
57 
2.A 
POL-5.B 
Inequality 
D 
80 
58 
3.A 
PRD-4.B 
Changes in Factor Demand and Factor Supply 
A 
85 
59 
2.A 
POL-4.A 
The Effects of Government Intervention  
in Different Market Structures 
C 
64 
60 
1.A 
POL-5.B 
Inequality 
D 
85 
Free-Response Questions 
Question 
Skill 
Learning Objective 
Topic 
Mean Score 
1 
2.A 
PRD-3.B 
Monopoly 
4.27 
2 
1.C 
CBA-2.A 
Marginal Analysis and Consumer Choice 
1.75 
3 
1.A 
PRD-3.C 
Oligopoly and Game Theory 
3.24 
