2019 
AP
® Microeconomics
Free-Response Questions
Set 1
© 2019 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are 
registered trademarks of the College Board. Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019 AP® MICROECONOMICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 
MICROECONOMICS 
Section II 
Total Time—1 hour 
Reading Period—10 minutes 
Writing Period—50 minutes 
Directions:  You are advised to spend the first 10 minutes reading all of the questions and planning your 
answers. You will then have 50 minutes to answer all three of the following questions. You may begin 
writing your responses before the reading period is over. It is suggested that you spend approximately half 
your time on the first question and divide the remaining time equally between the next two questions. 
Include correctly labeled diagrams, if useful or required, in explaining your answers. A correctly labeled 
diagram must have all axes and curves clearly labeled and must show directional changes. Use a pen with 
black or dark blue ink. 
 1. As the only gas station in a small town, FillUp has a local monopoly on the sale of gasoline. FillUp is currently 
earning positive economic profit. 
(a) Draw a correctly labeled graph for FillUp and show each of the following. 
(i) FillUp’s profit-maximizing quantity, labeled Q sub F
(ii) FillUp’s profit-maximizing price, labeled P sub F
 (iii) The deadweight loss associated with FillUp’s profit-maximizing quantity, shaded completely 
 (iv) The maximum quantity at which FillUp would earn zero economic profit, labeled Q sub Z 
(b) Assume that FillUp’s fixed costs increase because of a new lease on its property and FillUp stays in 
business. Will each of the following increase, decrease, or remain unchanged at FillUp’s profit-maximizing 
quantity? 
(i) The deadweight loss. Explain. 
(ii) FillUp’s economic profit 
(c) Assume the demand for gasoline decreases because people bike to work more often. 
(i) What must be true for FillUp to continue to operate in the short run? 
(ii) What happens to FillUp’s profit-maximizing quantity and price in the short run assuming the firm 
continues to operate? 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-2- 
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. The following is a table showing Dana’s marginal benefit from purchasing bottles of water and good X from a
grocery store.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019 AP® MICROECONOMICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 
Quantity of  
Water 
(in bottles) 
Marginal Benefit 
of Water 
(in dollars) 
1
24
2
18
3
12
4
6
5
3
Quantity of 
Good X  
(in units) 
Marginal Benefit 
of Good X       
(in dollars) 
1
24
2
18
3
12
4
6
5
3
(a) What is Dana’s total benefit from purchasing 2 bottles of water and 1 unit of good X? Show your work.
(b) Assume the price of a unit of good X is $5. Calculate the total consumer surplus if Dana purchases 3 units of
good X. Show your work. 
(c) Now assume the price of a bottle of water is $3 and the price of a unit of good X is $6. Dana spends her
entire budget of $30 on bottles of water and good X. 
(i) Explain why Dana does not maximize her benefit when she purchases 2 bottles of water and 4 units of 
good X. Use marginal analysis to explain your answer.
(ii) What are the optimal quantities of good X and bottles of water at these prices?  
(iii) Suppose the price of a unit of good X drops to $3. Calculate Dana’s cross-price elasticity of demand
for bottles of water with respect to the price of good X, and state whether the two goods are substitutes
or complements. Show your work. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-3-
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
T
h
e
 
f
i
g
u
r
e presents a p
ayoff 
matrix of
 the profi
ts from the fo
llowing
 two pizze
rias: Pat
rick’s Pi
e and Dee’
s Pizzeria. The left side of the matrix is labeled Patrick’s Pie, and the top side is labeled Dee’s Pizzeria. From top to bottom, the rows are labeled Advertise and Do Not Advertise. From left to right, the columns are labeled Enter and Stay Out. Each of the four sections of the table contains two dollar amounts. The data in each of the four cells are as follows. Row 1, column 1. Patrick’s Pie, Advertise, $50. Dee’s Pizzeria, Enter, negative $2. Row 1, column 2. Patrick’s Pie, Advertise, $175. Dee’s Pizzeria, Stay Out, $0. Row 2, column 1. Patrick’s Pie, Do Not Advertise, $150. Dee’s Pizzeria, Enter, $15. Row 2, column 2. Patrick’s Pie, Do Not Advertise, $100. Dee’s Pizzeria, Stay Out, $0.
 
 3. Patrick’s Pie is currently the only pizzeria in College Town. It can either advertise or not advertise. Dee’s
Pizzeria is contemplating whether to enter or stay out of the College Town market. Each pizza establishment
independently and simultaneously makes its decision. The payoff matrix above shows the profits for each
combination of decisions, and both players have complete information. The first entries in the payoff matrix are
Patrick’s profit, and the second entries are Dee’s profit.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019 AP® MICROECONOMICS FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS 
(a) What actions maximize the combined total profits for Patrick’s Pie and Dee’s Pizzeria?
(b) Conditional on your response in part (a), does either Patrick’s Pie or Dee’s Pizzeria have an incentive to
cheat on this combination of actions that maximize the combined total profits? Explain using numbers from
the matrix for each pizzeria.
(c) Does Patrick’s Pie have a dominant strategy?
(d) Identify the Nash equilibrium or equilibria actions for this game.
(e) Ignoring antitrust considerations, suppose that Patrick pays Dee’s Pizzeria $20 if Dee chooses to “Stay Out.”
(i) Redraw this matrix including players, actions, and payoffs, showing how Patrick’s Pie payment to Dee
affected the payoffs.
(ii) Identify the Nash equilibrium for the redrawn matrix.
STOP 
END OF EXAM 
-4-
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
