2025
AP
® Microeconomics
Free-Response Questions
Set 2
© 2025 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks 
of College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
2
© 2025 College Board.
AP MICROECONOMICS 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
MICROECONOMICS
SECTION II
TIME – 1 HOUR
Directions: 
Section II has 3 questions and lasts 1 hour. 
You may use the available paper for scratch work and planning, but you must write your answers 
in the free-response booklet. Label parts (e.g., A, B, C) and sub-parts (e.g., i, ii, iii) as needed. Use a 
pencil or a pen with black or dark blue ink to write your responses.  
Include correctly labeled graphs, if useful or required, in explaining your answers. A correctly 
labeled graph must have all axes and curves clearly labeled and must show directional changes. If 
the question prompts you to “Calculate,” you must show how you arrived at your final answer. 
A calculator is allowed in this section. You may use a handheld calculator that is approved for this 
exam or the calculator available in this application. 
You may pace yourself as you answer the questions in this section, or you may use these optional 
timing recommendations: 
It is suggested that you spend the first 10 minutes reading all of the questions and planning your 
answers. Then, it is suggested that you spend about 25 minutes on question 1 and about 12 minutes 
each on questions 2 and 3. 
You can go back and forth between questions in this section until time expires. The clock will turn 
red when 5 minutes remain—the proctor will not give you any time updates or warnings.
Note: This exam was originally administered digitally. It is presented here in a format optimized for 
teacher and student use in the classroom.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
3
© 2025 College Board.
AP MICROECONOMICS 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
1.	Deskward is a typical profit-maximizing firm that produces and sells wooden desks in a 
constant-cost, perfectly competitive market that is in long-run equilibrium.
A.	Draw correctly labeled side-by-side graphs for the wooden desk market and for Deskward 
and show each of the following.
i.	The market equilibrium price and quantity, labeled PM and QM, respectively
ii.	Deskward’s profit-maximizing price and quantity, labeled PF and QF, respectively
iii.	Deskward’s average total cost curve consistent with long-run equilibrium, labeled ATC
B.	If the monthly rent, a fixed cost, on Deskward’s factory building increases, what will happen 
to the firm’s profit-maximizing quantity in the short run? Explain.
C.	Suppose the government is considering granting a per-unit subsidy to producers of wooden 
desks. On your market graph in part A, show the short-run effect of a per-unit subsidy on 
each of the following.
i.	The new market equilibrium price and quantity of wooden desks, labeled P* and Q*, 
respectively
ii.	The area representing the total cost of the subsidy to the government, shaded completely
D.	Instead of the per-unit subsidy, suppose the government imposes a binding price floor in the 
market for wooden desks. Will the price floor result in a shortage of wooden desks, a surplus 
of wooden desks, or neither? Explain.
E.	 Deskward also produces chairs. Deskward increases its production from 500 chairs to 600 
chairs, and its long-run total cost increases from $80,000 to $108,000.
i.	Calculate Deskward’s long-run average total cost of producing 500 chairs. Show your 
work.
ii.	As Deskward increases production from 500 chairs to 600 chairs, is Deskward 
experiencing economies of scale, diseconomies of scale, or the efficient scale? Explain 
using numbers.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
4
© 2025 College Board.
AP MICROECONOMICS 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
2.	Quartz Excavations is a profit-maximizing firm and the only employer of miners of quartz in a 
small town. The graph provided shows the labor market for miners.
A.	Identify Quartz Excavations’ profit-maximizing number of miners to hire.
B.	Will Quartz Excavations pay its profit-maximizing number of miners a wage rate that is 
equal to $15, greater than $15, or less than $15? Explain using numbers.
C.	Suppose the government sets a minimum wage (a price floor on wages) at $25. Calculate the 
total wage bill for Quartz Excavations at the resulting profit-maximizing number of miners. 
Show your work.
D.	Suppose that instead of a minimum wage, there is now an increase in the demand for quartz.
i.	Will the marginal revenue product of miners increase, decrease, or remain the same? 
Explain.
ii.	After the demand for quartz increases, Quartz Excavations hires the new 
profit-maximizing number of miners. Will the marginal factor cost of the last 
miner hired be greater than, less than, or equal to the marginal factor cost of the 
last miner hired before the demand for quartz increased?


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
5
© 2025 College Board.
AP MICROECONOMICS 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
3.	The table provided shows the marginal utility for Lucy when she consumes Good X and Good Y.
Quantity of
Good X
Marginal Utility of Good
X (utils)
Quantity of
Good Y
Marginal Utility of Good
Y (utils)
1
20
1
28
2
16
2
24
3
12
3
16
4
8
4
8
5
4
5
−4
6
−2
6
−8
A.	If Good X and Good Y are free, how many units of each good will maximize Lucy’s total 
utility?
B.	Calculate Lucy’s total utility if she consumes 2 units of Good X and 2 units of Good Y. Show 
your work.
C.	Suppose instead that the price of each unit of Good X is $2 and the price of each unit of Good 
Y is $4. Lucy has a budget of $20 to spend on the two goods.
i.	If Lucy purchases 2 units of Good X, what is the maximum quantity of Good Y Lucy can 
purchase?
ii.	What is Lucy’s optimal combination of Good X and Good Y? Explain your answer using 
marginal analysis and numbers.
D.	Suppose the price elasticity of demand for Good X is −2 0. , the price elasticity of demand 
for Good Y is −0 8. , and the cross-price elasticity of demand between Good X and Good Y is 
+1 6. . Are goods X and Y complementary goods, substitute goods, normal goods, or inferior 
goods? Explain.
STOP
END OF EXAM
