The practice test includes images for which descriptions are provided in this document. In a standard test, the images are presented without descriptions. In this document, descriptions are included with the images so that assistive technology users will have an understanding of what is in each images. However, the descriptions in some cases may not be valid for testing purposes, and would not be used on an actual test. If you are taking the test in an alternate format, some or all questions of this type may be omitted. If any questions are omitted, the scoring rules for the test take such omissions into account to make sure you are neither advantaged nor disadvantaged by the omissions and that your scores are comparable to those of individuals taking another version of the test.
 
 
 
 
 
College Board LogoAP Logo
Psychology Practice Exam 
 
From the 2013 Administration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Practice Exam is provided by the College Board for AP Exam preparation. Teachers are 
permitted to download the materials and make copies to use with their students in a 
classroom setting only. To maintain the security of this exam, teachers should collect all 
materials after their administration and keep them in a secure location. 
Exams may not be posted on school or personal websites, nor electronically redistributed for 
any reason. Further distribution of these materials outside of the secure College Board site 
disadvantages teachers who rely on uncirculated questions for classroom testing. Any 
additional distribution is in violation of the College Board’s copyright policies and may result 
in the termination of Practice Exam access for your school as well as the removal of access to 
other online services such as the AP Teacher Community and Online Score Reports.  


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents 
 
Exam Instructions 
Student Answer Sheet for the Multiple-Choice Section  
Section I: Multiple-Choice Questions 
Section II: Free-Response Questions 
Multiple-Choice Answer Key 
Free-Response Scoring Guidelines 
Scoring Worksheet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: This publication shows the page numbers that appeared in the 2012−13 AP Exam 
Instructions book and in the actual exam. This publication was not repaginated to 
begin with page 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2013 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, SAT and the acorn logo are registered trademarks 
of the College Board. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners. Permission to use 
copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: www.collegeboard.com/inquiry/cbpermit.html.  


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
Exam Instructions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following contains instructions taken from 
the 2012−13 AP Exam Instructions book. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

221
AP® Psychology Exam
Regularly Scheduled Exam Date: Monday afternoon, May 6, 2013
Late-Testing Exam Date: Friday morning, May 24, 2013
Section I: At a Glance
Total Time:
1 hour, 10 minutes
Number of Questions:
100
Percent of Total Score:
66.6%
Writing Instrument:
Pencil required
Section I: Multiple Choice Booklet Instructions
Section I of this exam contains 100 multiple-choice questions. Fill in 
only the circles for numbers 1 through 100 on your answer sheet. 
Indicate all of your answers to the multiple-choice questions on the 
answer sheet. No credit will be given for anything written in this exam 
booklet, but you may use the booklet for notes or scratch work. After 
you have decided which of the suggested answers is best, completely fill 
in the corresponding circle on the answer sheet. Give only one answer 
to each question. If you change an answer, be sure that the previous 
mark is erased completely.
Use your time effectively, working as quickly as you can without losing 
accuracy. Do not spend too much time on any one question. Go on to 
other questions and come back to the ones you have not answered if 
you have time. It is not expected that everyone will know the answers 
to all of the multiple-choice questions. 
Your total score on the multiple-choice section is based only on the 
number of questions answered correctly. Points are not deducted for 
incorrect answers or unanswered questions. 
Section II: At a Glance
Total Time:
50 minutes
Number of Questions:
2
Percent of Total Score:
33.3%
Writing Instrument:
Pen with black or dark blue ink
Weight: 
The questions are weighted 
equally.
Section II: Free Response Booklet Instructions
The questions for Section II are printed in this booklet. You may use 
page 3 and the unlined pages of this booklet to organize your answers 
and for scratch work, but you must write your answers on the lined 
pages provided for each question. Begin each answer on the lined page 
facing the question. The questions are repeated for your convenience. 
Write clearly and legibly. Do not skip lines. Cross out any errors you 
make; crossed-out work will not be scored.
Manage your time carefully. Divide your time about equally between 
the two questions. You may proceed freely from one question to the 
next. You may review your responses if you finish before the end of the 
exam is announced.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

What Proctors Need to Bring to This Exam
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Exam packets
Answer sheets
AP Student Packs
2012-13 AP Coordinator’s Manual 
This book — AP Exam Instructions
School Code and Home-School/Self-
Study Codes
Pencil sharpener
•
•
•
•
•
•
Extra No. 2 pencils with erasers
Extra pens with black or dark blue ink
Lined paper
Stapler
Watch
Signs for the door to the testing room
–
– 
“Exam in Progress”
 “Cell phones are prohibited in the 
testing room”
SECTION I: Multiple Choice
 !
Do not begin the exam instructions below until you have completed the appropriate 
General Instructions for your group. 
Make sure you begin the exam at the designated time. 
If you are giving the regularly scheduled exam, say:
It is Monday afternoon, May 6, and you will be taking the AP Psychology Exam.
If you are giving the alternate exam for late testing, say:
It is Friday morning, May 24, and you will be taking the AP Psychology Exam.
In a moment, you will open the packet that contains your exam materials. 
By opening this packet, you agree to all of the AP Program’s policies and 
procedures outlined in the 2012-13 Bulletin for AP Students and Parents. You 
may now remove the shrinkwrap from your exam packet and take out the 
Section I booklet, but do not open the booklet or the shrinkwrapped Section II 
materials. Put the white seals aside. . . .
Carefully remove the AP Exam label found near the top left of your exam 
booklet cover. Now place it on page 1 of your answer sheet on the dark blue 
box near the top right-hand corner that reads “AP Exam Label.”
If students accidentally place the exam label in the space for the number label or vice versa, advise 
them to leave the labels in place. They should not try to remove the label; their exam will be 
processed correctly.  
Read the statements on the front cover of Section I and look up when you 
have finished. . . .
Sign your name and write today’s date. Look up when you have finished. . . .
Now print your full legal name where indicated. Are there any questions? . . .
222
Psychology


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Turn to the back cover and read it completely. Look up when you  
have finished. . . .
Are there any questions? . . .
Section I is the multiple-choice portion of the exam. You may never discuss 
these specific multiple-choice questions at any time in any form with 
anyone, including your teacher and other students. If you disclose these 
questions through any means, your AP Exam score will be canceled. Are there 
any questions? . . .
You must complete the answer sheet using a No. 2 pencil only. Mark all of 
your responses beginning on page 2 of your answer sheet, one response per 
question. Completely fill in the circles. If you need to erase, do so carefully 
and completely. No credit will be given for anything written in the exam 
booklet. Scratch paper is not allowed, but you may use the margins or any 
blank space in the exam booklet for scratch work. Are there any questions? . . .
You have 1 hour and 10 minutes for this section. Open your Section I booklet 
and begin. 
12
6
3
9
Note Start Time here 
. Note Stop Time here 
. Check that students are
marking their answers in pencil on their answer sheets, and that they are not looking at their 
shrinkwrapped Section II booklets. After 1 hour and 10 minutes, say: 
Stop working. Close your booklet and put your answer sheet on your desk, 
face up. Make sure you have your AP number label and an AP Exam label on 
page 1 of your answer sheet. I will now collect your answer sheet.
Collect an answer sheet from each student. Check that each answer sheet has an AP number label 
and an AP Exam label. Then say:
Now you must seal your exam booklet. Remove the white seals from the 
backing and press one on each area of your exam booklet cover marked 
“PLACE SEAL HERE.” Fold each seal over the back cover. When you have 
finished, place the booklet on your desk, face up. I will now collect your 
Section I booklet. . . . 
Collect a Section I booklet from each student. Check that each student has signed the front cover 
of the sealed Section I booklet.
There is a 10-minute break between Sections I and II. When all Section I materials have been 
collected and accounted for and you are ready for the break, say:
Please listen carefully to these instructions before we take a 10-minute break. 
Everything you placed under your chair at the beginning of the exam must stay 
there. Leave your shrinkwrapped Section II packet on your desk during the 
break. You are not allowed to consult teachers, other students, or textbooks 
about the exam during the break. You may not make phone calls, send text 
messages, check email, use a social networking site, or access any electronic 
or communication device. Remember, you are not allowed to discuss the 
multiple-choice section of this exam. If you do not follow these rules, your 
score could be canceled. Are there any questions? . . .
223
AP Exam Instructions
PSYCHOLOGY


--- PAGE BREAK ---

12
6
3
9
You may begin your break. Testing will resume at 
. 
SECTION II: Free Response
After the break, say:
May I have everyone’s attention? Place your Student Pack on your desk. . . .
You may now remove the shrinkwrap from the Section II packet, but do  
not open the exam booklet until you are told to do so. . . . 
Read the bulleted statements on the front cover of the exam booklet.  
Look up when you have finished. . . .
Now place an AP number label on the shaded box. If you don’t have any 
AP number labels, write your AP number in the box. Look up when you 
have finished. . . .
Read the last statement. . . . 
Using your pen, print the first, middle and last initials of your legal name 
in the boxes and print today’s date where indicated. This constitutes your 
signature and your agreement to the statements on the front cover. . . .
Turn to the back cover and complete Item 1 under “Important Identification 
Information.” Print the first two letters of your last name and the first letter 
of your first name in the boxes. Look up when you have finished. . . .
In Item 2, print your date of birth in the boxes. . . .
In Item 3, write the school code you printed on the front of your Student 
Pack in the boxes. . . .
Read Item 4. . . . 
Are there any questions? . . .
I need to collect the Student Pack from anyone who will be taking another 
AP Exam. You may keep it only if you are not taking any other AP Exams 
this year. If you have no other AP Exams to take, place your Student Pack 
under your chair now. . . .
While Student Packs are being collected, read the information on the back 
cover of the exam booklet. Do not open the booklet until you are told to do 
so. Look up when you have finished. . . .
Collect the Student Packs. Then say: 
Are there any questions? . . . 
You have 50 minutes to complete Section II. It is suggested that you divide 
your time equally between the two questions. You may use page 3 and 
the unlined pages of this booklet to organize your answers and for scratch 
work, but you must write your answers on the lined pages provided for each 
question. Begin each answer on the lined page facing the question. 
224
Psychology


--- PAGE BREAK ---

The questions are repeated for your convenience. You are responsible for 
pacing yourself, and you may proceed freely from one question to the next. 
You must write your answers in the exam booklet using a pen. If you need 
more paper during the exam, raise your hand. At the top of each extra piece 
of paper you use, be sure to write only your AP number and the number  
of the question you are working on. Do not write your name. Are there  
any questions? . . . 
You may begin. 
12
6
3
9
Note Start Time here 
. Note Stop Time here 
. Check that students are 
using pens to write their answers in their exam booklets. After 40 minutes, say:
There are 10 minutes remaining.
After 10 minutes, say: 
Stop working and close your exam booklet. Place it on your desk, face up. . . .
If any students used extra paper for the free-response section, have those students staple the extra 
sheet/s to the first page corresponding to that question in their exam booklets. Then say:
Remain in your seat, without talking, while the exam materials 
are collected. . . .
Collect a Section II booklet from each student. Check for the following:
•
•
Exam booklet front cover: The student placed an AP number label on the shaded box, and 
printed his or her initials and today’s date.
Exam booklet back cover: The student completed the “Important Identification 
Information” area.
When all exam materials have been collected and accounted for, return to students any electronic 
devices you may have collected before the start of the exam. 
If you are giving the regularly scheduled exam, say:
You may not discuss these specific free-response questions with anyone unless 
they are released on the College Board website in about two days. Your AP score 
results will be delivered online in July.
If you are giving the alternate exam for late testing, say:
None of the questions in this exam may ever be discussed or shared in any way  
at any time. Your AP score results will be delivered online in July.
If any students completed the AP number card at the beginning of this exam, say:
Please remember to take your AP number card with you. You will need the 
information on this card to view your scores and order AP score reporting 
services online.
Then say:
You are now dismissed.
225
AP Exam Instructions
PSYCHOLOGY


--- PAGE BREAK ---

All exam materials should be put in secure storage until they are returned to the AP Program 
after your school’s last administration. Before storing materials, check the “School Use Only” 
section on page 1 of the answer sheet and: 
•
•
Fill in the appropriate section number circle in order to access a separate AP  
Instructional Planning Report (for regularly scheduled exams only) or subject  
score roster at the class section or teacher level. See “Post-Exam Activities” in the  
2012-13 AP Coordinator’s Manual.
Check your list of students who are eligible for fee reductions and fill in the  
appropriate circle on their registration answer sheets. 
226
Psychology


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
Student Answer Sheet for  
the Multiple-Choice Section 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use this section to capture student responses. (Note that the following 
answer sheet is a sample, and may differ from one used in an actual exam.) 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---



--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
Section I: Multiple-Choice Questions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is the multiple-choice section of the 2013 AP exam. It includes cover material and 
other administrative instructions to help familiarize students with the mechanics of 
the exam. (Note that future exams may differ in look from the following content.) 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Psychology Exam
2013
SECTION I: Multiple Choice
DO NOT OPEN THIS BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO.
At a Glance
Total Time
1 hour, 10 minutes
Number of Questions
100
Percent of Total Score
66.6%
Writing Instrument
Pencil required
Instructions
Section I of this exam contains 100 multiple-choice questions. Fill in only the circles for
numbers 1 through 100 on your answer sheet.
Indicate all of your answers to the multiple-choice questions on the answer sheet. No
credit will be given for anything written in this exam booklet, but you may use the booklet
for notes or scratch work. After you have decided which of the suggested answers is best,
completely fill in the corresponding circle on the answer sheet. Give only one answer to
each question. If you change an answer, be sure that the previous mark is erased
completely. Here is a sample question and answer.Figure of a Sample Question and a Sample Answer. Chicago is a A. state, B. city, C. country, D. continent, E. village. 5 answer bubbles are shown, with correct answer B filled in.
Use your time effectively, working as quickly as you can without losing accuracy. Do not
spend too much time on any one question. Go on to other questions and come back to
the ones you have not answered if you have time. It is not expected that everyone will
know the answers to all of the multiple-choice questions.
Your total score on the multiple-choice section is based only on the number of questions
answered correctly. Points are not deducted for incorrect answers or unanswered
questions.
Form I
Form Code 4JBP4-S
85


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-4- 
PSYCHOLOGY 
SECTION I 
Time—1 hour and 10 minutes 
100 Questions 
 
 
Directions:  Each of the questions or incomplete statements below is followed by five suggested answers or 
completions. Select the one that is best in each case and then fill in the corresponding circle on the answer sheet. 
 
 
 1. According to Erik Erikson, in late adulthood the 
individual reaches the eighth and final stage of  
the life span in which one reviews and evaluates 
one’s life and the choices one has made. Erikson 
labeled this stage 
(A) initiative versus guilt 
(B) integrity versus despair 
(C) generativity versus stagnation 
(D) identity versus role confusion 
(E) intimacy versus isolation 
 2. When community psychologists refer to primary 
prevention, they are describing which of the 
following goals? 
(A) Keeping disorders from developing 
(B) Detecting and treating disorders early 
(C) Reducing the harm of psychological disorders 
to the individual and society 
(D) Ensuring that psychotherapy is available to 
all who seek it 
(E) Developing group therapies 
 3. Which of the following is true of a neuron in the 
resting state? 
(A) The inside of the cell membrane is negative 
compared to the outside. 
(B) The outside of the cell membrane is negative 
compared to the inside. 
(C) The concentration of sodium ions is equal 
inside and outside of the cell membrane. 
(D) Both the sodium and the potassium channels 
are open. 
(E) The neuron is not polarized. 
 
 
 The figure shows two overlapping circles.
 
 4. Luz, a math major, sees the drawing above as a 
Venn diagram. Her brother, an art major, sees it  
as two circles. The difference in perception is an 
example of 
(A) synesthesia 
(B) stereotyping 
(C) stimulus variables 
(D) top-down processing 
(E) feature detection 
 
 5. Transforming frustrated urges, especially sexual 
urges, into more socially acceptable forms of 
behavior is the defense mechanism known as 
(A) rationalization 
(B) displacement 
(C) intellectualization 
(D) suppression 
(E) sublimation 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-5- The figure shows a square with 11 non-overlapping lines inside it. The lines start at the top edge of the square where they are grouped together towards the midpoint of the top square edge. The middle line, the sixth line from the left, starts at the midpoint of the top square edge and ends at the midpoint of the bottom square edge. Starting from the left most line on the top edge of the square, the first 3 lines end on the left edge of the square, the next 5 lines end on the bottom edge of the square, and the last 3 lines end on the right edge of the square. The ends of the lines appear to have approximately the same spacing between them.
 
 6. Which monocular depth cue is illustrated in the 
figure above? 
(A) Accommodation 
(B) Texture gradient 
(C) Relative size 
(D) Interposition 
(E) Linear perspective 
 7. A group of friends watched a recent episode of  
a crime investigation show and concluded that 
they would have been able to figure out who  
was responsible for a crime more proficiently  
than did the television investigators. The friends’ 
overestimation of their ability to determine who 
committed the crime is most likely due to a 
reasoning error known as 
(A) the availability heuristic 
(B) hindsight bias 
(C) confirmation bias 
(D) cognitive dissonance 
(E) actor-observer bias 
 
 
 8. Reuptake of a neurotransmitter refers to 
 
(A) absorption of the neurotransmitter into the 
dendrites of the receiving neuron 
(B) absorption of the neurotransmitter into the 
terminal buttons of the sending neuron 
(C) release of the neurotransmitter by the soma  
of the originating neuron 
(D) the rate at which a neurotransmitter is created 
for use by a neuron 
(E) the rate at which a neurotransmitter is broken 
down metabolically in the neuron 
 9. Which of the following individuals would most 
likely be classified as exhibiting a social phobia? 
(A) Pablo, who is afraid of snakes 
(B) Priti, who is afraid of being humiliated when 
giving a speech 
(C) Chrissie, who avoids long flights on airplanes 
(D) Lisa, who is afraid of giving blood 
(E) Masato, who is always worried about her 
health 
 
10. Which of the following would be detrimental to an
individual’s maintenance of high self-esteem? 
(A) Setting unrealistic personal goals 
(B) Believing the cause of failure to be an 
unstable trait 
(C) Attempting always to think positively 
(D) Accepting personal strengths and weaknesses 
(E) Setting personal standards 
11. Marie has to assemble a shelf but cannot find her 
screwdriver. Which of the following would help 
her complete this task? 
(A) Confirmation bias 
(B) Functional fixedness 
(C) Rigidity 
(D) Divergent thought 
(E) Mental set 
 
 
 
 
12. A child’s sex is genetically determined 
by the 
 
(A) mother 
(B) father 
(C) paternal grandmother 
(D) maternal grandfather 
(E) maternal grandmother
13. In general, trait theories emphasize which of the 
following? 
 
(A) The changing and temporary nature of human 
characteristics 
(B) The role of current environmental conditions 
in controlling behavior 
(C) The lasting nature of personal characteristics 
(D) Identity confusion 
(E) Early childhood experiences 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-6- The figure shows a graph where the horizontal axis is labeled Group Size, the vertical axis is labeled Amount of Effort and the origin has the coordinates zero, zero. The numbers from 1 to 12 appear along the horizontal axis in increments of 1 and the numbers from zero to 20 appear along the vertical axis in increments of 5. There are 9 data points on the graph that appear to be at the coordinates listed below. The line goes between the data points and begins in the upper left portion of the graph and slopes steeply downward at first and then as the graph moves to the right becomes less steep and eventually flattens out almost parallel with the horizontal axis. The data points appear to be as follows. Group size, 1; Amount of effort, 20. Group size, 1 point 5; Amount of effort, 14. Group size, 2 point five; Amount of effort, 14. Group size, 3; Amount of effort, 11 point 5. Group size 3 point 5; Amount of effort, 9 point 5. Group size 4 point 5; Amount of effort, 5. Group size, 7 point 5; Amount of effort, 9 point 5. Group size, 11; Amount of effort, 7 point 5. Group size, 11 point 5, Amount of effort 7 point 5.
 
14. The graph above depicts the extent to which 
individuals in groups of various sizes exerted 
themselves while they performed a certain task. 
What does the information illustrate? 
(A) Social loafing 
(B) Social facilitation 
(C) Group polarization 
(D) Groupthink 
(E) Minority influence 
 
15. Researchers looking to create a drug to reduce  
the symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease would  
most likely focus their efforts on which of the 
following neurotransmitters? 
(A) Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
(B) Serotonin 
(C) Norepinephrine 
(D) Dopamine 
(E) Acetylcholine 
 
16. Delusional thinking is central to which of the 
following? 
(A) Fugue states 
(B) Panic attacks 
(C) Schizophrenic disorders 
(D) Dissociative disorders 
(E) Affective disorders 
 
17. In visual perception, size constancy occurs as an 
object comes closer to the viewer because the 
(A) image on the retina becomes smaller 
(B) image on the retina remains constant in size 
(C) perceived distance of the object becomes 
greater 
(D) perceived distance of the object becomes 
smaller 
(E) perceived distance of the object remains 
constant 
 
18. The two sentences “Elena won the race” and  
“The race was won by Elena” share which of  
the following structures? 
(A) Sentence 
(B) Syntactic 
(C) Surface 
(D) Deep 
(E) Phonemic 
 
19. A monkey’s choosing a circle from an array of 
geometric shapes in order to be rewarded with  
a banana is an example of 
(A) stimulus habituation 
(B) stimulus discrimination 
(C) positive transference 
(D) disinhibition 
(E) latent learning 
 
20. A sound is often detected by one ear more 
intensely and a fraction of a second earlier than  
it is detected by the other ear. These cues help 
individuals determine the 
(A) pitch of the sound wave 
(B) timbre of the sound wave 
(C) absolute threshold for sound perception 
(D) frequency of the sound wave 
(E) location of the source 
 
21. Juana accidentally touched a hot iron. She 
immediately drew back her hand. Which of the 
following is true about the withdrawal of her 
hand? 
(A) It was initiated in the motor cortex. 
(B) It was initiated in the spinal cord. 
(C) It was a voluntary behavior. 
(D) It was due to instructions from the brain. 
(E) It was an operantly conditioned response. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-7- 
22. Research finds that, in general, the higher an 
incoming college student scores on a given test,  
the higher the student’s college grade point average 
(GPA). Which of the following best describes this 
relationship? 
(A) A bimodal distribution 
(B) A normal distribution 
(C) A skewed distribution 
(D) A positive correlation 
(E) A negative correlation 
 
23. All of the following are anxiety disorders 
EXCEPT 
(A) agoraphobia 
(B) posttraumatic stress disorder 
(C) conversion disorder 
(D) obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(E) panic disorder 
 
24. Which of the following statements is supported by 
research on homosexuality? 
(A) There is a correlation between sexual orienta-
tion and early childhood problems. 
(B) There is a correlation between the sexual 
orientation of a child and the sexual 
orientation of his or her adoptive parents. 
(C) There is a correlation between sexual orienta-
tion and the size of the cerebellum. 
(D) It is possible that high levels of dopamine 
influence sexual orientation. 
(E) Studies of twins have shown a genetic predis-
position to homosexuality. 
 
25. Individuals who exhibit a strong moral sense, 
accept themselves as they are, are deeply 
democratic in nature, and are willing to act 
independently of social and cultural pressures 
would be described by Abraham Maslow as 
(A) real selves 
(B) ideal selves 
(C) fully functioning 
(D) humanistic 
(E) self-actualized 
 
 
Questions 26-27 are based on the following. 
Exam Scores 
8 
6 
5 
10 
5 
7 
1 
5 
10 
 
 
26. A student who scored at the mode would have 
how many points? 
(A) 
3 
(B) 
5 
(C) 
6 
(D) 
8 
(E) 10 
 
27. Which of the following is the median score? 
(A)  1 
(B)  5 
(C)  6 
(D)  8 
(E) 10 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-8- 
28. Which of the following situations describes an 
approach-avoidance conflict? 
(A) Mark must decide which of two attractive job 
offers to accept. 
(B) Nine-year-old Carl must decide which of two 
distasteful chores to do to avoid being 
punished by his parents. 
(C) Fred must select one menu item from among 
several at a popular restaurant. 
(D) Anna must decide whether to buy a used car 
that is in her price range but has several 
mechanical problems. 
(E) Sarah must decide how to spend the money 
she recently won in a lottery. 
 
29. When four-year-old Chris grabs a toy car from 
two-year-old Pat because Chris wants to play  
with the toy, Chris is demonstrating 
(A) hostile aggression 
(B) instrumental aggression 
(C) social facilitation 
(D) social inhibition 
(E) locus of control 
 
30. When confronted with the sequence “__N __” at 
the end of a word in a crossword puzzle, Tony 
inserts the letters “I” and “G” in the two blanks 
because that procedure has often led to the correct 
answer in previous puzzles. This example 
illustrates the use of 
(A) mental rotation 
(B) elaborative rehearsal 
(C) a heuristic 
(D) a prototype 
(E) a syllogism 
 
31. Light exposure therapy is most effective in 
treating 
(A) schizophrenia 
(B) seasonal affective disorder 
(C) obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(D) antisocial personality disorder 
(E) autism 
 
32. In the dark, an object is more clearly seen when 
viewed in peripheral vision than when viewed 
directly. This phenomenon occurs because the 
rods located in the retina are 
(A) more sensitive in the dark than cones and are 
not found in the fovea 
(B) less sensitive in the dark than cones and are 
not found in the fovea 
(C) as sensitive in the dark as cones and are few 
in number in the fovea 
(D) more numerous than cones are in the fovea 
(E) as numerous as cones are all over the retina 
 
33. A conscientious objector refuses to engage in 
combat because he cannot support the taking of 
human life. His reasoning best illustrates which 
stage in Lawrence Kohlberg’s theory of moral 
development? 
(A) Authoritative 
(B) Postconventional 
(C) Concrete operational 
(D) Conventional 
(E) Egocentric 
 
34. The fact that imprinting is most certain to occur 
if the opportunity for imprinting is presented to 
the organism at a very specific age indicates the 
existence of 
 
(A) a schema 
(B) a reflex 
(C) an archetype 
(D) a critical period 
(E) an unconscious inference 
 
35. The results of Stanley Milgram’s studies on 
obedience suggested that 
(A) obedient people are unable to empathize with 
others 
(B) most people resist social coercion 
(C) most people will not physically harm others 
even if ordered to do so 
(D) most people will obey perceived authority 
figures’ instructions to harm others 
(E) people usually obey their consciences when 
allowed to decide whether to follow orders 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-9- 
36. Primary sex characteristics include which of the 
following? 
(A) Deepened voice in males 
(B) Breast development in females 
(C) Presence of ovaries 
(D) Body hair 
(E) Menopause 
 
37. A disadvantage of longitudinal studies is that 
(A) differences observed among participants of 
different ages are usually due to differences 
in the environment in which they were 
reared 
(B) participants who drop out during the course 
of the study may be different in important 
ways from ones who do not drop out 
(C) unfamiliarity with testing situations can put 
older participants at a disadvantage 
(D) personality traits do not remain constant 
across the life span 
(E) men and women confront different develop-
mental crises in the course of their lives 
because of their different social roles 
 
38. A sudden inability to remember how to tie a 
certain kind of knot indicates a deficit in which 
kind of memory? 
(A) Declarative 
(B) Semantic 
(C) Iconic 
(D) Episodic 
(E) Procedural 
 
39. Which of the following concepts explains 
motivation in terms of an organism seeking 
to maintain its biological equilibrium? 
(A) Opponent-process 
(B) Plasticity 
(C) Homeostasis 
(D) Incentive 
(E) Natural selection 
 
40. Activation of the parasympathetic nervous system 
results in which of the following? 
(A) An increase in pupil dilation 
(B) An increase in respiratory rate 
(C) A decrease in digestion 
(D) A decrease in salivation 
(E) A decrease in heart rate 
 
41. Which of the following sets of concepts is central 
to social learning theory? 
(A) Observation, imitation, and modeling 
(B) Fixed interval, variable interval, and fixed 
ratio 
(C) Generalization, spontaneous recovery, and 
discrimination 
(D) Acquisition, extinction, and counter-
conditioning 
(E) Higher-order learning, negative 
reinforcement, and variable ratio 
 
42. Stanley Schachter’s explanation of emotions 
places emphasis on 
(A) simultaneous arousal and emotional 
experience 
(B) the role of the hypothalamus 
(C) the range of emotions that are genetically 
inherited 
(D) a cognitive appraisal of physiological arousal 
(E) an optimistic explanatory style 
 
43. Which of the following types of disorders is 
characterized by complaints of bodily symptoms 
that do not have a detectable medical cause but 
rather are caused by psychological factors? 
(A) Anxiety 
(B) Organic 
(C) Psychophysiological 
(D) Somatoform 
(E) Personality 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-10- 
44. All of the following are American Psychological 
Association ethical guidelines for researchers 
EXCEPT: 
(A) Research may not involve deception. 
(B) Participation must be voluntary. 
(C) Participants must be informed of potential 
risks. 
(D) Participants must be offered alternative 
activities if research participation is a course 
requirement. 
(E) Participants’ right to privacy must be 
protected. 
 
45. In a normal distribution, which of the following 
statements is true about the area that falls between 
one standard deviation above and one standard 
deviation below the mean? 
(A) It contains the bottom 50% of the 
distribution. 
(B) It contains the middle 50% of the 
distribution. 
(C) It contains the bottom 68% of the 
distribution. 
(D) It contains the middle 68% of the 
distribution. 
(E) It is the same as the square of the average 
deviation. 
 
46. Which of the following characterizes a behavioral 
approach to psychology? 
(A) A study of the unconscious motives involved 
in behavior 
(B) An introspective study of the mental imagery 
used in problem solving 
(C) An analysis of the neurons involved in 
memory storage 
(D) The use of a projective test to assess 
personality 
(E) A study of how reinforcement affects 
learning 
 
47. Research on physical attractiveness has 
shown that 
 
(A) most people disregard physical attractiveness 
when forming first impressions of others 
(B) judgments of women’s personalities are 
affected by their physical attractiveness, but 
judgments of men’s personalities are not 
(C) desirable personality characteristics are 
typically ascribed to good-looking people 
(D) good-looking people tend to be viewed as 
less intelligent and competent 
(E) men are less likely than women to make 
biased judgments of others based on 
physical appearance 
 
48. Which of the following is required for a 
psychological experiment? 
(A) More than one independent variable 
(B) Sophisticated equipment 
(C) Highly generalizable results 
(D) Precise operational definitions 
(E) A longitudinal design 
 
49. In Freudian theory, which of the following 
components of personality most resembles a 
conscience or censor? 
(A) Ego 
(B) Ego ideal 
(C) Id 
(D) Libido 
(E) Superego 
 
50. A research psychologist generalizes from  
a particular sample to an entire population.  
This is an example of 
(A) statistical inference 
(B) random sampling 
(C) a correlational study 
(D) stratified sampling 
(E) descriptive statistics 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-11- 
51. A reason that one typically does not notice  
a blind spot in the visual field is that  
(A) the blind spot is very small, and no visual 
stimuli are likely to be so small that the 
blind spot completely obscures them 
(B) most visual stimuli affect only one visual 
hemisphere, and one hemisphere can  
cover for the other 
(C) visual stimuli usually affect the occipital 
cortex in both hemispheres 
(D) the blind spot habituates to a stimulus when 
the head is held still 
(E) the brain fills in missing information so  
there is no awareness that the visual field  
is incomplete 
 
52. Metabolic activity in different areas of the brain 
can best be visualized by means of 
(A) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
(B) computed tomography (CT) 
(C) positron emission tomography (PET) 
(D) electroencephalography (EEG) 
(E) electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) 
 
53. A test is administered to 1,000 fourth graders 
across the country, and then it is readministered  
to the same children 90 days later. The test-retest 
results will yield an evaluation of the test’s 
(A) validity 
(B) reliability 
(C) cross-cultural fairness 
(D) factor analysis 
(E) goodness of fit 
 
54. Research on electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) has 
shown that it is most effective for treating which 
of the following disorders? 
(A) Conversion 
(B) Obsessive-compulsive 
(C) Major depressive 
(D) Antisocial personality 
(E) Posttraumatic stress 
 
55. Whenever Sarah’s mother answered the phone, 
Sarah would yell for her mother’s attention and 
her mother would end the phone conversation. 
Then Sarah’s mother began ignoring Sarah’s 
yelling and eventually Sarah stopped behaving 
that way. The change in Sarah’s behavior is an 
example of 
(A) discrimination 
(B) response generalization 
(C) systematic desensitization 
(D) extinction 
(E) spontaneous recovery 
 
56. A researcher shows the same video of an 
automobile accident to two different groups  
of participants. 
  Participants in group one are asked: “Did you see  
a broken headlight?” 
  Participants in group two are asked: “Did you see 
the broken headlight?” 
  The researcher finds that participants in group two 
are much more likely to recall having seen a 
broken headlight, even though there actually was 
no broken headlight in the video. The researcher 
is investigating the effects of which of the 
following on recall? 
(A) Algorithms 
(B) Heuristics 
(C) Framing 
(D) Proactive interference 
(E) The primacy effect 
 
57. The component of intelligence described by 
Raymond Cattell as involving the ability to 
understand logical relationships, reason abstractly, 
and learn quickly is related to which of the 
following? 
(A) Mental age 
(B) Intelligence quotient 
(C) Fluid intelligence 
(D) Emotional intelligence 
(E) Crystallized intelligence 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-12- 
58. According to the fundamental attribution error, 
which of the following is most likely to be a 
student’s explanation for a classmate’s failing 
exam grade? 
(A) The classmate was too lazy to study hard. 
(B) There were too many picky questions on the 
exam. 
(C) The classmate was not well. 
(D) The classmate missed class too often. 
(E) The classmate had no quiet place to study. 
 
 The figure shows a graph with the horizontal axis and a vertical axis, and two intersecting curves. The horizontal axis is labeled Arousal and the scale, from left to right, is Low to High. The vertical axis is labeled Performance Level and the scale, from bottom to top, is Low to High. There are two curves shown.  One curve is labeled Difficult Tasks and is shown with a solid line. The second curve is labeled Easy Tasks and is shown with a dotted line. The Difficult Tasks curve begins at the intersection of the horizontal and vertical axes and rises steeply upwards and has a maximum value at a low arousal and a high performance level.  As Arousal increases, the curve slopes inward and then steeply downward and gently levels off as it meets the horizontal axis. The Easy Tasks curve begins at the intersection of the horizontal and vertical axis and moves along the horizontal axes at low arousal and then rises steeply upwards at the midpoint between low and high arousal.  The Easy Task curve has a maximum value at high arousal and high performance levels.  After a high arousal and a high performance level, the curve slopes inward and then steeply downward and ends as it meets the horizontal axis. The two curves intersect when arousal is halfway between low and high arousal levels and performance is a little lower than halfway between low and high performance level.
 
59. The graph above supports which of the following 
statements? 
(A) Optimal performance is a function of task 
difficulty and level of arousal. 
(B) Difficult tasks require higher than usual 
levels of arousal for optimal performance. 
(C) Difficult tasks become easier when arousal  
is increased. 
(D) Performance level is independent of task 
difficulty. 
(E) Easy tasks require lower than usual levels  
of arousal for optimal performance. 
 
60. A client whose improvement during therapy is the 
result of his or her expectation of improvement 
rather than the result of the therapy itself is 
showing 
(A) tardive dyskinesia 
(B) a placebo effect 
(C) a disorder in remission 
(D) negative transference 
(E) catharsis 
 
61. According to psychoanalytic theory, the bases for 
the development of mental disorders are 
(A) maladaptive, learned patterns of behavior 
(B) social, economic, and cultural factors 
(C) unconscious conflicts that produce anxiety 
(D) physiological events that cause chemical 
imbalances in the brain 
(E) inherent moral weakness and lack of 
willpower 
 
62. A female student was rejected by a college 
because her score on a test used by the college to 
predict performance there was below the college’s 
cutoff score. An influential alumnus of the college 
intervened on the student’s behalf and the student 
was admitted. Four years later the student 
graduated with honors. The most likely 
explanation of this outcome is that the test 
(A) contained some degree of bias against women 
(B) had less than perfect validity 
(C) was partly an achievement test 
(D) was not standardized 
(E) had less than perfect reliability 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-13- 
63. Mark, a flight attendant, began his workday in  
a bad mood. However, by the end of the day,  
he felt much happier. According to the facial 
feedback hypothesis, what may have influenced 
Mark’s mood? 
(A) The flight was so full that Mark did not have 
time to reflect on events that were troubling 
him. 
(B) The change in flight altitude helped decrease 
Mark’s stress. 
(C) Because it is his job to be courteous to 
customers, Mark smiled at passengers 
frequently. 
(D) Mark helped several passengers who then 
told his supervisor how nice he was. 
(E) Mark is good friends with some of the other 
flight attendants, and they cheered him up 
during the flight. 
 
64. Most tests of personality are in the form of 
(A) inkblot tests 
(B) word association tests 
(C) structured interviews 
(D) self-report inventories 
(E) situational analyses 
 
65. Eleanor Gibson and Richard Walk used a visual 
cliff with a glass-covered drop-off to examine 
behavior in crawling infants. Even when coaxed 
by their mothers to crawl out onto the glass 
covering, most infants refused to do so, indicating 
that they had developed which of the following? 
(A) Depth perception 
(B) Selective attention 
(C) Perceptual constancy 
(D) Procedural memory 
(E) Sensory adaptation 
 
66. Psychologists characterize parents who consis-
tently demand their children’s compliance without 
discussion as 
(A) indifferent 
(B) permissive 
(C) indulgent 
(D) authoritative 
(E) authoritarian 
 
67. Most glands in the human body are 
a part of which system? 
(A) Circulatory 
(B) Skeletal 
(C) Respiratory 
(D) Renal 
(E) Endocrine 
 
68. An individual has recurring unwanted thoughts  
of doing harm to his family. This is consistent 
with a diagnosis of 
(A) dissociative identity disorder 
(B) posttraumatic stress disorder 
(C) attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(D) somatoform disorder 
(E) obsessive-compulsive disorder 
 
69. The occipital lobe of the human brain contains the 
centers for 
(A) hearing 
(B) vision 
(C) olfaction 
(D) tactile sensation 
(E) taste 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-14- 
Questions 70-71 are based on the following. 
A researcher is trying to determine whether  
a new painkilling medicine is effective in reducing 
headaches. Twenty adult participants sit in a noisy 
environment for 30 minutes and then rate the severity 
of their headaches on a scale from 0 (none) to 5 
(intense). Group M (the medicine group) receives a 
normal dose of the medicine. Group C (the control 
group) rests quietly. After 20 minutes, all participants 
again complete the headache rating scale. The 
statistically significant differences in headache 
severity on the posttest appear in the graph below. 
 The figure is a bar graph with 4 bars. The horizontal axis has 2 labels, from left to right the labels are Pretest and Posttest and the vertical axis is labeled Headache Severity. The horizontal axis has 2 bars at each label. For each label, the bar on the left represents Medicine and is filled in with diagonal lines. The bar on the right represents Control and the bar is shaded. The numbers and labels from bottom to top on the vertical axis appear as None 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, Intense 5. According to the bar graph, the information is as follows. Pretest:  Medicine, headache severity 4 point 5, Control, headache severity 4 point 4. Posttest:  Medicine, headache severity 1, Control, headache severity 2 point 5. 
 
 
70. Which of the following is the independent 
variable in this experiment? 
(A) The rating of headache severity 
(B) The medicine  
(C) The age of the participants 
(D) The 30 minutes of noise 
(E) The 20-minute interval 
 
71. Which of the following statements is supported by 
the results of this experiment? 
(A) The severity of headaches diminished among 
the group that received the medicine, 
whereas the severity of headaches in the 
control group was unchanged. 
(B) The groups showed equivalent decreases in 
the severity of their headaches from pretes
to posttest. 
t 
(C) The medicine was more effective in reducing 
the severity of the headaches than was quiet 
rest. 
(D) The medicine eliminated the headaches of 
participants to whom it was administered. 
(E) Quiet rest is not effective in reducing 
headaches. 
 
72. An individual’s ability to focus on a particular 
conversation in a noisy and crowded room is 
called 
(A) auditory localization 
(B) dichotic listening 
(C) deep processing 
(D) divided attention 
(E) selective attention 
 
73. The claim that a whole is different from the sum 
of its parts is central to which of the following 
schools of thought? 
(A) Connectionism 
(B) Functionalism 
(C) Gestalt psychology 
(D) Structuralism 
(E) Behaviorism 
 
74. When Mary was young, her father was trying to 
learn how to speak German and would listen to 
German tapes for hours in her presence. Mary 
paid very little attention to the tapes. Many years 
later, when Mary was in Germany, she was able to 
say a few German words in order to make herself 
understood. This is an example of 
(A) procedural memory 
(B) latent learning 
(C) regression 
(D) telegraphic speech 
(E) retroactive interference 
 
75. Self-help and support groups are an outgrowth of 
which therapeutic perspective? 
(A) Psychoanalytic 
(B) Behavioral 
(C) Biological 
(D) Humanistic 
(E) Cognitive 
 
76. When a person experiences two thoughts that are 
incompatible, psychological tension may be 
produced, leading to an attempt to reconcile the 
discrepant thoughts. Which of the following 
concepts best characterizes this response? 
(A) Approach-avoidance conflict 
(B) Drive reduction 
(C) Self-actualization 
(D) Opponent process 
(E) Cognitive dissonance 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-15- 
77. A patient reports constant sleepiness. A series of 
tests reveal that the patient’s sleep is frequently 
disrupted by periods of interrupted breathing and 
brief awakenings. Which of the following 
diagnoses would account for such symptoms? 
(A) Somnambulism 
(B) Sleep terrors 
(C) Narcolepsy 
(D) REM behavior disorder 
(E) Sleep apnea 
 
78. Joseph has blue eyes and brown hair and is tall. 
These characteristics are best described as 
(A) recessive genes 
(B) dominant genes 
(C) mutations 
(D) genotypic traits 
(E) phenotypic traits 
 
79. People often have expectations about another 
person that influence how they act toward  
that person. Such expectations in turn cause that 
person to behave consistently with the original 
expectations. The phenomenon is known as 
(A) a self-fulfilling prophecy 
(B) mental set 
(C) the mere-exposure effect 
(D) hindsight bias 
(E) social facilitation 
 
80. Which of the following statements best describes 
the effect of alcohol on human functioning? 
(A) It depresses the central nervous system. 
(B) It increases alertness and enhances perception. 
(C) It facilitates the release of norepinephrine. 
(D) It depresses the thyroid system. 
(E) It distorts auditory perception. 
 
81. In Jean Piaget’s theory of cognitive development, 
which of the following best exemplifies the 
concept of accommodation? 
(A) A newborn touched lightly on the right cheek 
turns his head to the right. 
(B) An infant reaches out toward the moon as  
if to grasp it. 
(C) An infant stops reaching for a toy as soon  
as it is covered by a cloth. 
(D) An infant acquires a fear of heights after 
learning to crawl. 
(E) An infant trying unsuccessfully to suck  
her fist opens her mouth wider and is 
successful. 
 
82. The role of the therapist in cognitive therapy is to 
(A) identify the client’s irrational beliefs and 
provide alternative ways of believing 
(B) provide unconditional positive regard so that 
the healthy growth-promoting tendencies  
of the client may be activated 
(C) interpret the client’s dreams and guide the 
client through the processes of resistance 
and transference 
(D) provide a model of effective functioning and 
reinforce the client for positive changes 
(E) prescribe psychoactive drugs that can reduce 
the level of psychotic ideation 
 
83. In the experiments of Solomon Asch, the tendency 
of group members to conform was reduced most 
by which of the following factors? 
(A) The presence of a single dissenter 
(B) Frequent interaction among the group 
members 
(C) The appointment of a democratic leader 
(D) A decentralized communication network 
(E) The threat of punishment 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-16- 
84. Which of the following correctly pairs subdivisions 
within the major divisions of the human nervous 
system? 
(A) Somatic . . endocrine and exocrine 
(B) Central . . somatic and sympathetic 
(C) Autonomic . . sympathetic and 
parasympathetic 
(D) Sympathetic . . parasympathetic and 
autonomic 
(E) Peripheral . . central nervous system 
and the spinal cord 
 
85. Which of the following argues that physiological 
needs create aroused psychological states that 
cause us to try to satisfy those needs? 
(A) Instinct theory 
(B) Drive theory 
(C) Arousal theory 
(D) Incentive theory 
(E) Hierarchy of needs 
 
86. A dog retrieves the newspaper every day because 
in the past it received a food reward for this 
behavior. The dog’s behavior is an example of 
which of the following? 
(A) An operant response 
(B) A discriminative stimulus 
(C) An unconditioned response 
(D) An unconditioned stimulus 
(E) A classically conditioned response 
 
87. As a child, George often skipped school and 
engaged in repeated acts of vandalism and petty 
theft. As an adult, he has been arrested for running 
a dishonest investment company. The most likely 
diagnosis for George’s current behavior is 
(A) narcissistic personality disorder 
(B) antisocial personality disorder 
(C) borderline personality disorder 
(D) dissociative identity disorder 
(E) oppositional defiant disorder 
 
88. Which of the following best reflects contemporary 
interpretations of classical conditioning? 
(A) They remain relatively unchanged from 
earlier interpretations by people like  
E. L. Thorndike. 
(B) They are primarily based on the theory  
of contiguity. 
(C) They take into account cognitive  
processes like expectancy. 
(D) They are in agreement with the 
interpretations of behaviorists like  
B. F. Skinner. 
(E) They make a clear distinction between  
long-term and short-term memory. 
 
89. Diffusion of responsibility has been used to 
explain which of the following findings in  
social psychology? 
(A) People often conform because of peer 
pressure. 
(B) People in a group lose their individual 
identity and become more cohesive. 
(C) A person who is alone while witnessing  
an emergency is more likely to help  
than if he were part of a group. 
(D) People often perform better when working in 
a group than when working alone. 
(E) Many participants obey a researcher even  
if the researcher’s instructions might lead  
to harm for another participant. 
 
90. On a test, the mean score for a class of 100 
students is 80 and the standard deviation of the 
scores is 10. The professor who gave the test then 
realizes that she made a scoring error, which she 
corrects by adding 5 points to each student’s 
score. The standard deviation of the students’  
new scores is 
(A) 
5 
(B) 10 
(C) 10.5 
(D) 15 
(E) 85 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-17- 
91. A researcher asks participants to identify red 
shapes presented on a video screen. Following 
this, novel objects of various colors are depicted 
on the screen. Participants correctly identify red 
objects more quickly than objects of a different 
color. The result illustrates 
(A) assimilation 
(B) modeling 
(C) priming 
(D) cone saturation 
(E) imprinting 
 
92. Of the following topics, which would a cognitive 
psychologist be most likely to study? 
(A) Conformity behavior of college students 
(B) Genetic determinants of behavior 
(C) Problem-solving strategies in chess 
(D) Personnel selection problems 
(E) Maturational processes in adolescent
development 
 
 
93. Research suggests that hypnosis is effective in 
reducing pain because it 
(A) induces a state of amnesia 
(B) synchronizes the functioning of the two 
cerebral hemispheres 
(C) interferes with the functioning of brain cells 
(D) diverts attention from the pain 
(E) lowers the subject’s level of suggestibility 
 
94. An industrial-organizational psychologist would 
be most likely to study the 
(A) cognitive development of adults 
(B) recreational activities in a community center 
(C) effectiveness of management training 
(D) industrialization of the United States 
(E) career development of high school students 
 
95. Which of the following research approaches 
would be best for testing the hypothesis that 
the presence of certain odors causes people 
to gamble more? 
(A) Experimental 
(B) Observational 
(C) Correlational 
(D) Survey 
(E) Case study 
 
96. Four-year-old Scott fell down the stairs at his 
grandmother’s house. Although he was not badly 
hurt, he was very frightened. Now, whenever his 
parents mention visiting his grandmother’s house, 
he feels anxious and fearful. In classical 
conditioning terms, what are the conditioned 
stimulus (CS) and the unconditioned stimulus 
(UCS) in the scenario, respectively? 
(A) Grandmother’s house; fear 
(B) Grandmother’s house; falling 
(C) Fear; grandmother’s house 
(D) Falling; anxiety 
(E) Anxiety; fear 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
 
-18- 
97. Which of the following refers to the potential of 
an individual to perform an as-yet-unlearned task? 
(A) Aptitude 
(B) Interest 
(C) Cultural fairness 
(D) Achievement 
(E) Projection 
 
98. Which of the following describes the different 
emotional dispositions of infants?  
(A) Imprinting 
(B) Temperament 
(C) Mental set 
(D) Instinct 
(E) Attachment 
 
99. Two-year-old Jia tells her grandmother that she 
“sweeped” the floor yesterday. The scenario 
illustrates that children 
(A) cannot learn grammatical rules during the 
first two years of life 
(B) learn language primarily through operant 
conditioning 
(C) will model only words used by adults in their 
environment 
(D) overgeneralize the use of grammatical rules 
(E) are not born with an innate language 
acquisition device 
 
100. Damage to which of the following best explains 
conduction deafness? 
(A) Basilar membrane 
(B) Hammer, anvil, and stirrup 
(C) Auditory nerve 
(D) Temporal lobe 
(E) Central sulcus 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
END OF SECTION I 
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, YOU MAY  
CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS SECTION. 
 
DO NOT GO ON TO SECTION II UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
 
 
 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE DONE THE FOLLOWING. 
PLACED YOUR AP NUMBER LABEL ON YOUR ANSWER SHEET 
WRITTEN AND GRIDDED YOUR AP NUMBER CORRECTLY ON YOUR  
ANSWER SHEET 
TAKEN THE AP EXAM LABEL FROM THE FRONT OF THIS BOOKLET  
AND PLACED IT ON YOUR ANSWER SHEET  
 
• 
• 
• 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
Section II: Free-Response Questions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This is the free-response section of the 2013 AP exam. It includes cover material and 
other administrative instructions to help familiarize students with the mechanics of 
the exam. (Note that future exams may differ in look from the following content.) 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Psychology Exam
2013
SECTION II: Free Response
DO NOT OPEN THIS BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO.
At a Glance
Total Time
50 minutes
Number of Questions
2
Percent of Total Score
33.3%
Writing Instrument
Pen with black or dark
blue ink
Weight
The questions are
weighted equally.
Instructions
The questions for Section II are printed in this booklet. You may use page 3 and the
unlined pages of this booklet to organize your answers and for scratch work, but you must
write your answers on the lined pages provided for each question. Begin each answer on
the lined page facing the question. The questions are repeated for your convenience.
Write clearly and legibly. Do not skip lines. Cross out any errors you make; crossed-out
work will not be scored.
Manage your time carefully. Divide your time about equally between the two questions.
You may proceed freely from one question to the next. You may review your responses if
you finish before the end of the exam is announced.
Form I
Form Code 4JBP4-S
85


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
-3- 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS. 
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
 
Question 1 begins on page 4. 
 
Question 2 begins on page 12. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-4- 
PSYCHOLOGY 
SECTION II 
Time—50 minutes
Percent of total score—33
 
 
 
Directions:  You have 50 minutes to answer BOTH of the following questions. It is not enough to answer a question 
by merely listing facts. You should present a cogent argument based on your critical analysis of the questions posed, 
using appropriate psychological terminology. 
 
 
 1. Psychologists agree that both biology and environment influence personality, mental processing, and behaviors. 
A. Different biological mechanisms are associated with each of the following. Explain one biological 
mechanism for each. Definitions alone will not score. 
Aggression 
Color blindness 
Hunger 
B. Different environmental factors are associated with each of the following. Explain one environmental factor 
for each. Definitions alone will not score. 
Anorexia nervosa 
Context-dependent memory 
Gender role 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS. 
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-5- 
ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-6- 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 1. Psychologists agree that both biology and environment influence personality, mental processing, and behaviors. 
A. Different biological mechanisms are associated with each of the following. Explain one biological 
mechanism for each. Definitions alone will not score. 
Aggression 
Color blindness 
Hunger 
B. Different environmental factors are associated with each of the following. Explain one environmental factor 
for each. Definitions alone will not score. 
Anorexia nervosa 
Context-dependent memory 
Gender role 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-7- 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-8- 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 1. Psychologists agree that both biology and environment influence personality, mental processing, and behaviors. 
A. Different biological mechanisms are associated with each of the following. Explain one biological 
mechanism for each. Definitions alone will not score. 
Aggression 
Color blindness 
Hunger 
B. Different environmental factors are associated with each of the following. Explain one environmental factor 
for each. Definitions alone will not score. 
Anorexia nervosa 
Context-dependent memory 
Gender role 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-9- 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-10- 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 1. Psychologists agree that both biology and environment influence personality, mental processing, and behaviors. 
A. Different biological mechanisms are associated with each of the following. Explain one biological 
mechanism for each. Definitions alone will not score. 
Aggression 
Color blindness 
Hunger 
B. Different environmental factors are associated with each of the following. Explain one environmental factor 
for each. Definitions alone will not score. 
Anorexia nervosa 
Context-dependent memory
Gender role 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-11- 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-12- 
 2. Brianna’s home state was holding a singing competition, and the prize was a recording contract. Brianna loves to 
sing, but she gets anxious when she sings for strangers and therefore did not want to participate. Brianna felt 
pressure from her family and friends to compete. 
A. Explain how each of the following concepts could have influenced Brianna’s decision whether to enter the 
competition. 
Negative reinforcement 
Normative social influence 
B. Brianna decided to enter the competition. Explain how each of the following may relate to her performance. 
Adrenal glands 
Exhaustion stage of general adaptation syndrome (GAS) 
Schachter and Singer’s two-factor theory of emotion 
C. Although Brianna rehearsed her song and felt that she sang very well, she was eliminated from the 
competition. When Brianna tells others about her experience, how might she use the self-serving bias  
to help explain her elimination? 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS. 
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-13- 
ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-14- 
Question 2 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 2. Brianna’s home state was holding a singing competition, and the prize was a recording contract. Brianna loves to 
sing, but she gets anxious when she sings for strangers and therefore did not want to participate. Brianna felt 
pressure from her family and friends to compete. 
A. Explain how each of the following concepts could have influenced Brianna’s decision whether to enter the 
competition. 
Negative reinforcement 
Normative social influence 
B. Brianna decided to enter the competition. Explain how each of the following may relate to her performance. 
Adrenal glands 
Exhaustion stage of general adaptation syndrome (GAS) 
Schachter and Singer’s two-factor theory of emotion 
C. Although Brianna rehearsed her song and felt that she sang very well, she was eliminated from the 
competition. When Brianna tells others about her experience, how might she use the self-serving bias  
to help explain her elimination? 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-15- 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-16- 
Question 2 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 2. Brianna’s home state was holding a singing competition, and the prize was a recording contract. Brianna loves to 
sing, but she gets anxious when she sings for strangers and therefore did not want to participate. Brianna felt 
pressure from her family and friends to compete. 
A. Explain how each of the following concepts could have influenced Brianna’s decision whether to enter the 
mpetition. 
Negative reinforcement 
Normative social influence 
B. Brianna decided to enter the competition. Explain how each of the following may relate to her performance. 
Adrenal glands 
Exhaustion stage of general adaptation syndrome (GAS) 
Schachter and Singer’s two-factor theory of emotion 
C. Although Brianna rehearsed her song and felt that she sang very well, she was eliminated from the 
competition. When Brianna tells others about her experience, how might she use the self-serving bias  
to help explain her elimination? 
co
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-17- 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-18- 
Question 2 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 2. Brianna’s home state was holding a singing competition, and the prize was a recording contract. Brianna loves to 
sing, but she gets anxious when she sings for strangers and therefore did not want to participate. Brianna felt 
pressure from her family and friends to compete. 
A. Explain how each of the following concepts could have influenced Brianna’s decision whether to enter the 
competition. 
Negative reinforcement 
Normative social influence 
B. Brianna decided to enter the competition. Explain how each of the following may relate to her performance. 
Adrenal glands 
Exhaustion stage of general adaptation syndrome (GAS) 
Schachter and Singer’s two-factor theory of emotion 
C. Although Brianna rehearsed her song and felt that she sang very well, she was eliminated from the 
competition. When Brianna tells others about her experience, how might she use the self-serving bias  
to help explain her elimination? 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-19- 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
-20- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STOP 
 
END OF EXAM 
 
 
THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS APPLY TO THE COVERS OF THE  
SECTION II BOOKLET. 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE COMPLETED THE IDENTIFICATION  
INFORMATION AS REQUESTED ON THE FRONT AND BACK  
COVERS OF THE SECTION II BOOKLET. 
CHECK TO SEE THAT YOUR AP NUMBER LABEL APPEARS IN  
THE BOX(ES) ON THE COVER(S). 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE USED THE SAME SET OF AP  
NUMBER LABELS ON ALL AP EXAMS YOU HAVE TAKEN  
THIS YEAR. 
 
• 
• 
• 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
Multiple-Choice Answer Key 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following contains the answers to the 
multiple-choice questions in this exam. 
  


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Answer Key for AP Psychology 
Practice Exam, Section I 
 
Question 1: B 
Question 2: A 
Question 3: A 
Question 4: D 
Question 5: E 
Question 6: E 
Question 7: E 
Question 8: B 
Question 9: B 
Question 10: A 
Question 11: D 
Question 12: B 
Question 13: C 
Question 14: A 
Question 15: E 
Question 16: C 
Question 17: D 
Question 18: D 
Question 19: B 
Question 20: E 
Question 21: B 
Question 22: D 
Question 23: C 
Question 24: E 
Question 25: E 
Question 26: B 
Question 27: C 
Question 28: D 
Question 29: B 
Question 30: C 
Question 31: B 
Question 32: A 
Question 33: B 
Question 34: D 
Question 35: D 
Question36: C 
Question 37: B 
Question 38: E 
Question 39: C 
Question 40: E 
Question 41: A 
Question 42: D 
Question 43: D 
Question 44: A 
Question 45: D 
Question 46: E 
Question 47: C 
Question 48: D 
Question 49: E 
Question 50: A 
Question 51: E 
Question 52: C 
Question 53: B 
Question 54: C 
Question 55: D 
Question 56: C 
Question 57: C 
Question 58: A 
Question 59: A 
Question 60: B 
Question 61: C 
Question 62: B 
Question 63: C 
Question 64: D 
Question 65: A 
Question 66: E 
Question 67: E 
Question 68: E 
Question 69: B 
Question 70: B 
Question 71: C 
Question 72: E 
Question 73: C 
Question 74: B 
Question 75: D
Question 76: E 
Question 77: E 
Question 78: E 
Question 79: A
Question 80: A
Question 81: E 
Question 82: A
Question 83: A
Question 84: C 
Question 85: B 
Question 86: A
Question 87: B 
Question 88: C 
Question 89: C 
Question 90: B 
Question 91: C 
Question 92: C 
Question 93: D
Question 94: C 
Question 95: A 
Question 96: B 
Question 97: A
Question 98: B 
Question 99: D
Question 100: B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
Free-Response Scoring Guidelines 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following contains the scoring guidelines  
for the free-response questions in this exam. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2013 SCORING GUIDELINES 
 
© 2013 The College Board.  
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 
Question 1 
 
General Considerations 
1. If points are not presented in order, students must clearly indicate to which part of the question 
they are responding. 
2. All responses must be written in complete sentences. 
3. A correct definition alone cannot score. Students must establish a connection to the prompt for 
each point. 
4. A definition may contribute to the answer but the student must also provide an explanation of the 
relationship between the term and the biological mechanism or environmental factor. 
5. Since definitions do not score, if a student provides an incorrect definition but a correct 
explanation of the biological mechanism or environmental factor associated with the term, the 
point should score. 
6. Students will not be penalized for misinformation unless it directly contradicts correct information 
that would otherwise score a point. 
7. Rubric examples provided for each point are not to be considered exhaustive. 
 
Part A: Points 1 – 3 
All points must explain an APPROPRIATE biological mechanism for the specific term (e.g., aggression, 
color-blindness, hunger). 
 
Point 1 - Aggression 
Responses must address how ONE of the following influences aggression. (Aggression must be 
the outcome.) 
 
A. A specific biological structure (e.g., amygdala, hypothalamus, septum, limbic system) 
 
Examples  
Score “Stimulation of the amygdala in primates produces increased aggression.” 
 
Score “Damage to the limbic system may produce defensive aggression.” 
 
Score “Aggression may result from frontal lobe activity that is compromised.” 
 
B. Biological system activity (e.g., sympathetic nervous system) 
 
Examples 
Score “Arousal of the sympathetic nervous system could lead to aggression.” 
 
Score “An individual may act aggressively when their body is in a state of fight or flight.” 
 
C. Hormone/neurotransmitter levels (e.g., testosterone, serotonin) 
 
Examples 
Score “Research has shown a relationship between testosterone levels in the bloodstream and 
aggressive behavior.” 
 
Score “Low levels of serotonin may lead to aggressive behavior.” 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2013 SCORING GUIDELINES  
 
© 2013 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 
Question 1 (continued) 
 
D. Genetic component (e.g., inherited traits) 
 
Examples 
Score “Children with aggressive tendencies may have inherited them from a parent.” 
 
Score “Identical twins may share the common inherited characteristic of impulsiveness, which 
leads both to be aggressive.” 
 
Point 2 - Color blindness 
The response must explain ONE of the following mechanisms as related to the inability to see color. 
 
A. A biological structure or process involved in vision. 
 
Examples 
Score “Deficiencies in color receptors (cones), ganglia, optic nerve, or occipital lobe may result in 
color blindness.” 
 
Score “Retinitis pigmentosa is a medical condition that destroys photoreceptors and causes loss 
of color vision.” 
 
Score “Some people only have some types of cones and thereby cannot see the full spectrum 
of color.” 
 
B. A specific genetic mechanism. 
 
Examples 
Score “Color blindness can be caused by a recessive gene on the 23rd pair.” 
 
Score “People born with cones containing only one or two of the three color-sensitive pigments 
cannot see all colors (e.g., trichromatic theory).” 
 
Score “Color blindness is a sex-linked disorder occurring more often in males than females (or is 
related to the X chromosome).” 
 
Point 3 - Hunger 
Responses must address how ONE of the following relates to hunger. 
 
A. A specific biological structure (e.g., stomach, hypothalamus) 
 
Examples 
Score “The hypothalamus triggers feelings of hunger.” 
 
Score “Stimulation of your lateral hypothalamus could increase your hunger.” 
 
Score “Stimulation of your ventromedial hypothalamus could decrease your hunger.” 
 
Score “Lesioning either of the above structures could result in the opposite hunger response.” 
 
Score “Stomach contractions can cause us to feel hungry.” 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2013 SCORING GUIDELINES  
 
© 2013 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 
Question 1 (continued) 
 
B. Biological system activity (e.g., digestive system, hypothalamic neurons, metabolism) 
Examples 
Score “Activation of neurons in the hypothalamus increases hunger. 
 
Score “A person with a fast metabolic rate could become hungry quickly.” 
 
Score “Lowered levels of energy signal the body that it needs nourishment.” 
C. Hormone/neurotransmitter levels (e.g., glucose, insulin, GABA, leptin, ghrelin) 
Examples 
Score “When blood sugar/glucose drops, the brain is signaled to trigger the feeling of hunger.” 
 
Score “Low insulin levels trigger feelings of hunger.” 
 
Score “When receptors in the brain sense high levels of leptin from fat cells, our feelings of hunger 
are inhibited.” 
 
Score “Serotonin levels affect your appetite.” 
 
D. Specific genetic mechanism (e.g., inherited traits) 
Example 
Score “Individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome have an insatiable appetite.” 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2013 SCORING GUIDELINES  
 
© 2013 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 
Question 1 (continued) 
 
Part B: Points 4 - 6 
All points must explain an APPROPRIATE environmental factor for the specific term (e.g., anorexia 
nervosa, context-dependent memory, and gender role). The response must include more than the mention 
of an environmental factor.  
 
Point 4 - Anorexia 
The response must explain an environmental factor related to anorexia nervosa. 
Examples 
Score “Cultures may differ in the acceptance of body image. In many cultures women may be more 
likely to see themselves as overweight, and thus, cause one to under eat.” 
 
Score “Thin models may serve as examples of an “idealized” appearance, leading some to starve 
themselves.” 
 
Score “Parents who are over-controlling may cause their child to be a perfectionist about weight and 
become anorexic.” 
 
Score “An athlete or performer might become anorexic in order to compete at a level to which they 
aspire (e.g., wrestler, gymnast, runner, dancer, actor).” 
 
Score “A person might become anorexic in order to receive a particular incentive (e.g., social 
acceptance, a date, approval from family members, job).” 
 
Point 5 - Context-dependent memory 
The response must explain the role of context (e.g., a particular setting, environment, location, 
surrounding) in enhancing/hindering memory. 
Examples 
Score “People are more likely to remember material when tested in the same setting where they 
learned that material.” 
 
Score “Memory for the content of the class declines when tested in a setting other than the learning 
environment.” 
 
Score “A person is flooded with childhood memories when they go back to their childhood home.” 
 
Do not score “State Dependent Memory – memory that is aided or impeded by an internal state.” 
 
Do not score “Mood Congruent Memory – memory that is aided or impeded by an emotional state.” 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2013 SCORING GUIDELINES  
 
© 2013 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 
Question 1 (continued) 
 
Point 6 - Gender role 
The response must explain the role of an environmental factor as it relates to acquisition, perception, or 
expression of gender roles. 
Examples 
Score “Individuals acquire gender role behaviors that are modeled by members of their culture, 
family, peer group, etc.” 
 
Score “A person is reinforced or punished for behavior consistent or inconsistent with their gender.”
 
Score “Culture shapes perceptions of gender behaviors or schemas.” 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2013 SCORING GUIDELINES 
 
© 2013 The College Board.  
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 
Question 2 
 
General considerations 
1. If points are not presented in order, students must clearly indicate to which part of the question 
they are responding. 
2. All responses must be written in complete sentences. 
3. A correct definition alone cannot score. Students must establish a connection to the prompt for 
each point. 
4. A definition may contribute to the answer but the student must also provide an explanation of the 
relationship between the term and Brianna or the competition. 
5. Since definitions do not score, if a student provides an incorrect definition but a correct application
with the term, the point should score. 
6. Students will not be penalized for misinformation unless it directly contradicts correct information 
that would otherwise score a point. 
7. Rubric examples provided for each point are not to be considered exhaustive. 
8. Responses must demonstrate knowledge of the terms presented in the question stem, by providing
a synonym or explanation of the term. 
 
Part A: Points 1-2 
Decision to enter 
 
Point 1 - Negative Reinforcement 
Response must include an increase in Brianna’s likelihood to enter or not to enter the competition in order 
to avoid or escape an aversive or unpleasant consequence. 
Examples 
Score “Brianna enters the competition to reduce the pressure from her family.” 
 
Score “Singing reduces Brianna’s anxiety. As a result, she sings more often". 
 
Score “She chooses to play basketball instead of compete, in order to avoid the anxiety of singing in 
front of strangers.” 
 
Do not score ”Punishment – decrease in likelihood of a particular behavior.” 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2013 SCORING GUIDELINES  
 
© 2013 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 
Question 2 (continued) 
 
Point 2 - Normative social influence 
Response must address a process influencing Brianna to feel/think/act in a way that aligns with social 
norms OR that Brianna’s actions are based on social expectations. 
Examples: 
Score “Brianna decides to enter the competition only because she wants to please her parents, who 
were also involved with music.” 
 
Score “She decides to compete because all of her friends are singers and she wants to fit in, so she 
joins the competition.” 
 
Do not score “Compliance/obedience – entering to comply with a directive from others.” 
 
Do not score “Peer pressure alone.” 
 
Part B: Points 3-5 
Performance 
 
Point 3 - Adrenal glands 
Response must include ALL of the following 
A. Adrenal hormone/neurotransmitter activity  
B. The impact of the hormone release  
C. Relationship to performance 
 
Examples 
Score “Epinephrine was released into her body, causing her to have more energy and thereby 
sing longer.” 
 
Score “Because Brianna had too much adrenaline in her system, her performance suffered because 
she was over aroused.” 
 
Score “Performance causes her adrenaline levels to increase, making her feel “wired” after her 
performance.” 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2013 SCORING GUIDELINES  
 
© 2013 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 
Question 2 (continued) 
 
Point 4 - Exhaustion stage of general adaptation syndrome (GAS) 
Response must include reference to ALL of the following 
A. Prolonged stress OR third stage of the GAS; 
B. A decline in coping/adaptation OR depletion of bodily resources (e.g., lack of concentration, loss of 
sleep, restlessness, irritability, crying spells); and 
C. Relationship to performance. 
 
Example 
Score “Brianna’s performance suffered as a result of the psychological fatigue she felt from dealing 
with the prolonged stress of the competition schedule.” 
 
Do not score “Exhaustion - physically worn out from competing or extended practicing.” 
 
Do not score “Resistance - (stage 2 of GAS) physical resources are depleted but the organism 
continues to cope". 
 
Point 5 - Schachter and Singer 2-factor theory of emotion 
Response must include reference to BOTH of the following 
A. Emotion results from an experience of arousal AND a cognitive label of the arousal; and 
B. Relationship to performance. 
 
Examples: 
Score “Brianna was on stage and noticed she had butterflies in her stomach. Thus, she figured she 
was anxious and ended up performing poorly.” 
 
Score “When she realized her heart rate was going up, she thought that she should be excited. 
Brianna then went on to sing better than she ever had.” 
 
Part C: Point 6 
Telling Others 
 
Point 6 - Self-serving bias 
Response must include a denial of personal responsibility for failure OR attribution of her failure to an 
external source. 
 
Examples 
Score “Brianna told her friends that she was eliminated because the judges just didn’t like her 
costume.” 
 
Score “Brianna explained to others that her elimination was not her fault.” 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B 
 
Scoring Worksheet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The following provides a worksheet and conversion table  
used for calculating a composite score of the exam. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
2013 AP Psychology Scoring Worksheet 
Section I: Multiple Choice 
  
 Number Correct 
(out of 100) 
1.0000  = 
 Weighted Section I Score
(Do not round) 
Section II: Free Response 
Question 1 
(out of 6) 
  
4.1666  =
(Do not round) 
Question 2 
(out of 6) 
  
4.1666  =
 (Do not round)
 Sum  = 
Weighted 
Section II 
Score 
(Do not round) 
Composite Score 
Weighted 
Section I Score 
+
Weighted 
Section II Score 
=
 Composite Score 
(Round to nearest 
  whole number) 
AP Score Conversion Chart 
Psychology 
Composite 
Score Range 
AP Score 
110-150 
5 
  92-109 
4 
77-91 
3 
65-76 
2 
  0-64 
1 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP Psychology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The College Board 
The College Board is a mission-driven not-for-profit organization that connects students to college success and opportunity. 
Founded in 1900, the College Board was created to expand access to higher education. Today, the membership association is 
made up of over 6,000 of the world’s leading educational institutions and is dedicated to promoting excellence and equity in 
education. Each year, the College Board helps more than seven million students prepare for a successful transition to college 
through programs and services in college readiness and college success — including the SAT® and the Advanced Placement 
Program®. The organization also serves the education community through research and advocacy on behalf of students, 
educators, and schools. The College Board is committed to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is 
embodied in all of its programs, services, activities, and concerns. 
 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.  
