AP Psychology
Practice Exam
From the 2018 Administration
This exam may not be posted on 
school or personal websites, nor 
electronically redistributed for 
any reason. This Released Exam is 
provided by the College Board for 
AP Exam preparation. Teachers are 
permitted to download the materials 
and make copies to use with their 
students in a classroom setting only. 
To maintain the security of this exam, 
teachers should collect all materials 
after their administration and keep 
them in a secure location. 
Further distribution of these 
materials outside of the secure 
College Board site disadvantages 
teachers who rely on uncirculated 
questions for classroom testing. 
Any additional distribution is in 
violation of the College Board’s 
copyright policies and may result 
in the termination of Practice Exam 
access for your school as well as the 
removal of access to other online 
services such as the AP Teacher 
Community and Online Score Reports. 
© 2018 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo 
are registered trademarks of the College Board. Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents 
Exam Instructions 
Student Answer Sheet for the Multiple-Choice Section  
Section I: Multiple-Choice Questions 
Section II: Free-Response Questions 
Multiple-Choice Answer Key 
Free-Response Scoring Guidelines 
Scoring Worksheet 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data 
Note: This publication shows the page numbers that appeared in  
the 2017−18 AP Exam Instructions book and in the actual exam.  
This publication was not repaginated to begin with page 1. 
© 2018 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, SAT and the acorn logo are 
registered trademarks of the College Board. All other products and services may be trademarks of their 
respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: 
www.collegeboard.org/request-form. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Exam Instructions 
The following contains instructions taken from 
the 2017−18 AP Exam Instructions book. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 









 
 
 
 
 
 






 
 
– 
– 
AP Psychology Exam  
Regularly Scheduled Exam Date: Monday afternoon, May 7, 2018 
Late-Testing Exam Date: Wednesday morning, May 23, 2018 
Section I 
Total Time: 1 hour and 10 minutes 
Number of Questions: 100 
(The number of questions may vary slightly depending on the form of the exam.) 
Percent of Total Score: 66.6% 
Writing Instrument: Pencil required 
Section II 
Total Time: 50 minutes 
Number of Questions: 2 essays 
Percent of Total Score: 33.3% 
Writing Instrument: Pen with black or dark blue ink 
Before Distributing Exams: Check that the title on all exam covers is Psychology. If there are any exam booklets 
with a different title, contact the AP coordinator immediately. 
What Proctors Need to Bring to This Exam 
Exam packets 
Answer sheets 
AP Student Packs 
2017-18 AP Coordinator’s Manual 
This book—2017-18 AP Exam Instructions 
AP Exam Seating Chart template 
School Code and Homeschool/Self-Study Codes 
Pencil sharpener 
Container for students’ electronic devices (if needed) 
Extra No. 2 pencils with erasers 
Extra pens with black or dark blue ink 
Lined paper 
Stapler 
Watch 
Signs for the door to the testing room 
“Exam in Progress” 
“Cell phones are prohibited during the test 
administration, including breaks” 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam 
238 
2017–18 AP Exam Instructions
 
 › 
SECTION I: Multiple Choice 
Do not begin the exam instructions below until you have completed the 
appropriate General Instructions for your group. 
Make sure you begin the exam at the designated time. Remember, you must complete 
a seating chart for this exam. See pages 303–304 for a seating chart template and 
instructions. See the 2017-18 AP Coordinator’s Manual for exam seating requirements 
(pages 55–58). 
If you are giving the regularly scheduled exam, say: 
It is Monday afternoon, May 7, and you will be taking the AP Psychology Exam. 
If you are giving the alternate exam for late testing, say: 
It is Wednesday morning, May 23, and you will be taking the AP Psychology Exam. 
Look at your exam packet and confirm that the exam title is “AP Psychology.” 
Raise your hand if your exam packet contains any title other than 
“AP Psychology,” and I will help you. 
Once you confirm that all students have the correct exams, say: 
In a moment, you will open the exam packet. By opening this packet, you 
agree to all of the AP Program’s policies and procedures outlined in the 
2017-18 Bulletin for AP Students and Parents. 
You may now remove the shrinkwrap from your exam packet and take out the 
Section I booklet, but do not open the booklet or the shrinkwrapped Section II 
materials. Put the white seals aside. . . . 
Carefully remove the AP Exam label found near the top left of your exam 
booklet cover. Place it on page 1 of your answer sheet on the light blue box near 
the top right corner that reads “AP Exam Label.” 
If students accidentally place the exam label in the space for the number label or vice 
versa, advise them to leave the labels in place. They should not try to remove the label; 
their exam can still be processed correctly. 
Listen carefully to all my instructions. I will give you time to complete each 
step. Please look up after completing each step. Raise your hand if you have 
any questions. 
Give students enough time to complete each step. Don’t move on until all students are ready. 
Read the statements on the front cover of the Section I booklet. . . . 
Sign your name and write today’s date. . . . 
Now print your full legal name where indicated. . . . 
Turn to the back cover of your exam booklet and read it completely. . . . 
Are there any questions? . . . 
You will now take the multiple-choice portion of the exam. You should have in 
front of you the multiple-choice booklet and your answer sheet. You may never 
discuss the multiple-choice exam content at any time in any form with anyone, 
including your teacher and other students. If you disclose the multiple-choice 
exam content through any means, your AP Exam score will be canceled. 
Open your answer sheet to page 2. You must complete the answer sheet using a 
No. 2 pencil only. Mark all of your responses beginning on page 2 of your answer 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam  ﻿
AP Psychology Exam  
239
2017–18 AP Exam Instructions
sheet, one response per question. Completely fill in the circles. If you need to 
erase, do so carefully and completely. No credit will be given for anything written 
in the exam booklet. Scratch paper is not allowed, but you may use the margins or 
any blank space in the exam booklet for scratch work. Are there any questions? . . .
You have 1 hour and 10 minutes for this section. Open your Section I booklet 
and begin. 
Note Start Time 
 . Note Stop Time 
 .
Check that students are marking their answers in pencil on their answer sheets and that 
they are not looking at their shrinkwrapped Section II booklets. 
After 1 hour, say: 
There are 10 minutes remaining.
After 10 minutes, say:
Stop working. Close your booklet and put your answer sheet on your desk, 
faceup. Make sure you have your AP number label and an AP Exam label on 
page 1 of your answer sheet. Sit quietly while I collect your answer sheets.
Collect an answer sheet from each student. Check that each answer sheet has an AP 
number label and an AP Exam label. 
After all answer sheets have been collected, say:
Now you must seal your exam booklet using the white seals you set aside 
earlier. Remove the white seals from the backing and press one on each area of 
your exam booklet cover marked “PLACE SEAL HERE.” Fold each seal over the 
back cover. When you have finished, place the booklet on your desk, faceup. 
I will now collect your Section I booklet. . . . 
Collect a Section I booklet from each student. Check that each student has signed the front 
cover of the sealed Section I booklet.
There is a 10-minute break between Sections I and II. 
When all Section I materials have been collected and accounted for and you are 
ready for the break, say:
Please listen carefully to these instructions before we take a 10-minute break. 
All items you placed under your chair at the beginning of this exam must stay 
there, and you are not permitted to open or access them in any way. Leave your 
shrinkwrapped Section II packet on your desk during the break. You are not 
allowed to consult teachers, other students, notes, or textbooks during the 
break. You may not make phone calls, send text messages, check email, use 
a social networking site, or access any electronic or communication device. 
Remember, you may never discuss the multiple-choice exam content with 
anyone, and if you disclose the content through any means, your AP Exam score 
will be canceled. Are there any questions? . . .
You may begin your break. Testing will resume at 
 .


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam ﻿
240
2017–18 AP Exam Instructions
SECTION II: Free Response
After the break, say:
May I have everyone’s attention? Place your Student Pack on your desk. . . .
You may now remove the shrinkwrap from the Section II packet, but do not open 
the exam booklet until you are told to do so. . . . 
Read the bulleted statements on the front cover of the exam booklet. Look up 
when you have finished. . . .
Now take an AP number label from your Student Pack and place it on the shaded 
box. If you don’t have any AP number labels, write your AP number in the box. Look 
up when you have finished. . . .
Read the last statement. . . . 
Using your pen, print the first, middle, and last initials of your legal name in the 
boxes and print today’s date where indicated. This constitutes your signature and 
your agreement to the statements on the front cover. . . .
Turn to the back cover and, using your pen, complete Item 1 under “Important 
Identification Information.” Print the first two letters of your last name and the 
first letter of your first name in the boxes. Look up when you have finished. . . .
In Item 2, print your date of birth in the boxes. . . .
In Item 3, write the school code you printed on the front of your Student Pack in 
the boxes. . . .
Read Item 4. . . . 
Are there any questions? . . .
If this is your last AP Exam, you may keep your Student Pack. Place it under your 
chair for now. Otherwise I will collect all Student Packs. . . .
Read the information on the back cover of the exam booklet. Do not open the 
booklet until you are told to do so. Look up when you have finished. . . .
Collect the Student Packs. 
Then say: 
Are there any questions? . . . 
You have 50 minutes to complete Section II. It is suggested that you divide your 
time equally between the two questions. You may use page 3 and the unlined 
pages of the booklet to organize your answers and for scratch work, but you 
must write your answers on the lined pages provided for each question. Begin 
each answer on the first lined page facing the question. 
The questions are repeated for your convenience. You are responsible for pacing 
yourself, and you may proceed freely from one question to the next. You must 
write your answers in the exam booklet using your pen. If you need more paper 
during the exam, raise your hand. At the top of each extra sheet of paper you use, 
write only your AP number and the question number you are working on. Do not 
write your name. Are there any questions? . . . 
You may begin. 
Note Start Time 
 . Note Stop Time 
 .
Check that students are using pens to write their answers in their exam booklets. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam  ﻿
AP Psychology Exam  
241
2017–18 AP Exam Instructions
After 40 minutes, say:
There are 10 minutes remaining.
After 10 minutes, say: 
Stop working and close your exam booklet. Place it on your desk, faceup. . . .
If any students used extra paper for a question in the free-response section, have those 
students staple the extra sheet(s) to the first page corresponding to that question in 
their exam booklets. Complete an Incident Report after the exam (see page 67 of the 
2017-18 AP Coordinator’s Manual for complete details). 
Then say:
Remain in your seat, without talking, while the exam materials are collected. . . .
Collect a Section II booklet from each student. Check for the following:
Exam booklet front cover: The student placed an AP number label on the shaded box 
and printed their initials and today’s date.
Exam booklet back cover: The student completed the “Important Identification 
Information” area.
When all exam materials have been collected and accounted for, return to students any 
electronic devices you may have collected before the start of the exam. 
If you are giving the regularly scheduled exam, say:
You may not discuss or share the free-response exam content with anyone unless 
it is released on the College Board website in about two days. Your AP Exam 
score results will be available online in July.
If you are giving the alternate exam for late testing, say:
None of the content in this exam may ever be discussed or shared in any way at 
any time. Your AP Exam score results will be available online in July.
If any students completed the AP number card at the beginning of this exam, say:
Please remember to take your AP number card with you. You will need the 
information on this card to view your scores and order AP score reporting 
services online.
Then say:
You are now dismissed.
After-Exam Tasks
Be sure to give the completed seating chart to the AP coordinator. Schools must retain 
seating charts for at least six months (unless the state or district requires that they be 
retained for a longer period of time). Schools should not return any seating charts in their 
exam shipments unless they are required as part of an Incident Report.
NOTE: If you administered exams to students with accommodations, review the 2017-18 AP 
Coordinator’s Manual and the 2017-18 AP SSD Guidelines for information about completing 
the NAR form, and returning these exams.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam ﻿
242
2017–18 AP Exam Instructions
The exam proctor should complete the following tasks if asked to do so by the 
AP coordinator. Otherwise, the AP coordinator must complete these tasks:
Complete an Incident Report for any students who used extra paper for the free-response 
section. (Incident Report forms are provided in the coordinator packets sent with 
the exam shipments.) These forms must be completed with a No. 2 pencil. It is 
best to complete a single Incident Report for multiple students per exam subject, per 
administration (regular or late testing), as long as all required information is provided. 
Include all exam booklets with extra sheets of paper in an Incident Report return 
envelope (see page 67 of the 2017-18 AP Coordinator’s Manual for complete details).
Return all exam materials to secure storage until they are shipped back to the 
AP Program. (See page 26 of the 2017-18 AP Coordinator’s Manual for more information 
about secure storage.) Before storing materials, check the “School Use Only” section on 
page 1 of the answer sheet and: 
Fill in the appropriate section number circle in order to access a separate 
AP Instructional Planning Report (for regularly scheduled exams only) or subject 
score roster at the class section or teacher level. See “Post-Exam Activities” in the 
2017-18 AP Coordinator’s Manual.
Check your list of students who are eligible for fee reductions and fill in the 
appropriate circle on their registration answer sheets.





--- PAGE BREAK ---

Student Answer Sheet for 
the Multiple-Choice Section 
Use this section to capture student responses. (Note that the following 
answer sheet is a sample, and may differ from one used in an actual exam.) 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

A P Answer Sheet 2018 page 1


--- PAGE BREAK ---

A P Answer Sheet 2018 page 2


--- PAGE BREAK ---

A  
P
 A
ns
w
e r 
Sh
ee
t 
20
1
8  
p
ag
e 
3


--- PAGE BREAK ---

A P Answer Sheet 2018 page 4


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Section I: Multiple-Choice Questions 
This is the multiple-choice section of the 2018 AP Exam.  
It includes cover material and other administrative instructions 
to help familiarize students with the mechanics of the exam. 
(Note that future exams may differ in look from the following content.) 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Psychology Exam 
2018 
SECTION I: Multiple Choice 
DO NOT OPEN THIS BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
At a Glance 
Total Time 
1 hour and 10 minutes 
Number of Questions 
100 
Percent of Total Score 
66.6% 
Writing Instrument 
Pencil required 
Instructions 
Section I of this exam contains 100 multiple-choice questions. Fill in only the circles for 
numbers 1 through 100 on your answer sheet. 
Indicate all of your answers to the multiple-choice questions on the answer sheet. No 
credit will be given for anything written in this exam booklet, but you may use the booklet 
for notes or scratch work. After you have decided which of the suggested answers is best, 
completely fill in the corresponding circle on the answer sheet. Give only one answer to 
each question. If you change an answer, be sure that the previous mark is erased 
completely. Here is a sample question and answer. Sample Question and Sample Answer. 
Chicago is a 
A. state, B. city, C. country, D. continent E. village
5 answer circles are shown, with the correct answer B filled in.
Use your time effectively, working as quickly as you can without losing accuracy. Do not 
spend too much time on any one question. Go on to other questions and come back to 
the ones you have not answered if you have time. It is not expected that everyone will 
know the answers to all of the multiple-choice questions. 
Your total score on the multiple-choice section is based only on the number of questions 
answered correctly. Points are not deducted for incorrect answers or unanswered 
questions. 
Form I 
Form Code 4OBP4-S 
85 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-3- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
PSYCHOLOGY 
SECTION I 
Time—1 hour and 10 minutes 
100 Questions 
Directions:  Each of the questions or incomplete statements below is followed by five suggested answers or 
completions. Select the one that is best in each case and then fill in the corresponding circle on the answer sheet. 
 1. Which of the following methods best limits the 
influence of unknown variables in an experiment? 
(A) Random assignment 
(B) Correlational study 
(C) Debriefing 
(D) Stratified sampling 
(E) Subject matching 
 2. Marissa is a good tennis player whose 
performance seems to improve as the crowd 
watching her gets larger. The best explanation for 
this phenomenon is 
(A) the bystander effect 
(B) misattribution 
(C) social facilitation 
(D) a social schema 
(E) the self-serving bias 
 3. Sheila has a favorite book that she enjoys so much 
she has read it several times. This book is now 
assigned in her literature class, and students 
receive gift certificates for each chapter they read.  
As the class progresses through the book, Sheila 
finds she enjoys it less. This illustrates 
(A) overjustification 
(B) anchoring and adjustment 
(C) habituation 
(D) extinction 
(E) cognitive dissonance 
 4. A patient with symptoms of depression is working 
with a psychologist and reports that he has no 
meaningful relationships and no skills that allow 
him to make friends. The psychologist determines 
that the patient's beliefs and lack of interpersonal 
skills are the primary contributors to his 
depression. Which of the following treatments  
is the psychologist most likely to use? 
(A) Cognitive-behavioral therapy 
(B) Electroconvulsive therapy E C T
(C) Psychoanalysis 
(D) Repetitive transcranial magnetic  
stimulation R T M S
(E) Antidepressant medications
 5. Dr. Lee is interested in the effect of lighting on 
people’s ability to concentrate. Dr. Lee studies 
this by manipulating the amount of lighting while 
participants read and then measuring their scores 
on a reading comprehension test. Group 1 
receives dim light, and group 2 receives bright 
light. Which of the following research methods is 
Dr. Lee using? 
(A) A case study 
(B) A survey 
(C) A correlational study 
(D) An experiment 
(E) A simulation 
 6. Psychodynamic therapy has its roots in the 
theories of  
(A) Sigmund Freud 
(B) B. F. Skinner 
(C) Abraham Maslow 
(D) Carl Rogers 
(E) John B. Watson 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-4- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 7. Which of the following is an example of a 
compulsion? 
(A) Having uncontrollable thoughts 
(B) Having frequent daydreams 
(C) Checking the doors twenty times before 
going to bed 
(D) Refusing to leave the home because of worry 
about having a panic attack 
(E) Believing that aliens are stealing thoughts 
 8. Samuel became ill after eating pepperoni pizza 
and refuses to eat it now. However, he still enjoys 
plain pizza. Samuel’s eating behavior illustrates 
(A) negative reinforcement 
(B) discrimination 
(C) shaping 
(D) generalization 
(E) chaining 
 9. According to social psychologists, which of the 
following characteristics makes two people 
LEAST likely to develop a lasting romantic 
relationship? 
(A) Having very different personalities 
(B) Being in four classes and 
three extracurricular clubs together 
(C) Living on the same floor in a college dorm 
(D) Being highly attracted to each other 
(E) Having similar levels of physical 
attractiveness 
10. Which of the following describes the correct order 
of information processing in vision? 
(A) Bipolar cells→rods and cones→ganglion 
cells→optic nerve 
(B) Optic nerve→rods and cones→bipolar 
cells→ganglion cells 
(C) Rods and cones→bipolar cells→ganglion 
cells→optic nerve 
(D) Ganglion cells→bipolar cells→rods and 
cones→optic nerve 
(E) Rods and cones→ganglion cells→bipolar 
cells→optic nerve 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-5- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
The figure presents the graphs of two lines in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled “Condition During Recall Testing.” The condition “Sad” is indicated at the left end of the horizontal axis, and the condition “Happy” is indicated at the right end of the horizontal axis. The vertical axis is labeled “Percentage of Words Recalled During Testing,” and the numbers 40 through 100, in increments of 10, are indicated. One line represents participants who learned words in a sad mood, and the other line represents participants who learned words in a happy mood. The behavior of each line is as follows. For participants who learned words in a sad mood, the line begins just above 80 percent at the “Sad” condition. It moves downward and to the right until it ends just under 50 percent at the “Happy” condition. For participants who learned words in a happy mood, the line begins at just under 50 percent at the “Sad” condition. It moves upward and to the right until it ends just under 80 percent at the “Happy” condition. The two lines intersect approximately halfway along the horizontal axis, at approximately 65 percent.
11. In an experiment, either a sad video or a happy video  
was shown to participants to influence their moods. The 
participants were then asked to memorize a list of words. 
Later, the participants were again shown either the same 
video they had seen before memorizing the words or they 
were shown the other video, and they were then asked to 
recall the words they had memorized previously. The results 
of the experiment, summarized in the chart above, best 
illustrate which psychological concept? 
(A) Episodic memory 
(B) State-dependent memory 
(C) Latent learning 
(D) Observational learning 
(E) Encoding failure 
12. The brain’s ability to adapt after it is damaged is 
known as 
(A) integration 
(B) plasticity 
(C) polarization 
(D) lateralization 
(E) specificity 
13. Which of the following measures can be precisely 
located on the graph of a skewed distribution 
without doing any calculations? 
(A) Mode 
(B) Median 
(C) Mean 
(D) Standard deviation 
(E) Variance 
14. Bailey and Marcus packed everything they 
thought they would need for a weekend camping 
trip. When it rained and they realized they had not 
brought rain gear, Bailey said, “I knew we should 
have packed raincoats!” Bailey’s thinking 
illustrates which of the following concepts? 
(A) An algorithm 
(B) A flashbulb memory 
(C) Hindsight bias 
(D) The representativeness heuristic 
(E) Prospective memory 
15. Michael states that his friend Scott is cheap. 
Michael does not realize he himself is cheap. If 
Scott is not cheap, which of the following defense 
mechanisms is Michael using? 
(A) Regression 
(B) Displacement 
(C) Identification 
(D) Projection 
(E) Reaction formation 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-6- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
16. Using a mathematical formula to find the solution 
to a problem is an example of 
(A) elaborative rehearsal 
(B) a means-end analysis 
(C) insight 
(D) an algorithm 
(E) divergent thinking 
17. It is important for researchers to use precise 
operational definitions when 
(A) they want to ensure that conditions are 
assigned randomly 
(B) they want to be able to replicate the 
experiment 
(C) they want to organize the hypotheses 
appropriately 
(D) they are conducting experimental research 
but not correlational research 
(E) they are conducting an experiment with no 
independent and dependent variables 
18. Research participants are randomly assigned to 
one of three groups. One group listens to a list  
of words, another group reads a list of words 
printed on paper, and the remaining group hears 
and reads the words. The researcher then tests the 
participants’ memories to see how many words 
the members of each group can recall. The 
modality in which the words are presented  
(i.e., auditory, visual, or both) is which type  
of variable? 
(A) Confounding 
(B) Dependent 
(C) Independent 
(D) Extraneous 
(E) Control 
19. The utterance “likes dog my swim to” does not 
sound correct because it violates the rules of 
(A) lexicon 
(B) prosody 
(C) syntax 
(D) fast mapping 
(E) morphemes 
20. Which of the following are involved in regulating 
circadian rhythms? 
(A) Prefrontal cortex, occipital lobe, cerebellum 
(B) Photoreceptors, hypothalamus, pineal gland 
(C) Proprioceptors, thalamus, somatosensory 
cortex 
(D) Medulla, thalamus, pituitary gland 
(E) Cerebral cortex, motor cortex, adrenal glands 
21. Which of the following treatments would reduce a 
drinker’s dependence on alcohol by changing the 
positive effect of alcohol to a negative one? 
(A) Systematic desensitization 
(B) Insight therapy 
(C) Aversive conditioning 
(D) Psychoanalysis 
(E) A token economy 
22. When Betty lost her job, she kept returning to 
work each morning because she did not remember 
that she had been fired. She saw a doctor, who 
found no brain injury or other neurological 
condition that would prevent her from 
remembering. Which psychological disorder is 
Betty most likely experiencing? 
(A) Bipolar disorder 
(B) Schizophrenia 
(C) Obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(D) Dissociative amnesia 
(E) Antisocial personality disorder 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-7- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
23. Damage to Wernicke’s area is most likely to be 
associated with difficulty in 
(A) tasting 
(B) hearing 
(C) seeing 
(D) understanding language 
(E) moving arms and legs 
24. Which of the following is most likely to be used 
as evidence against the concept of g ? 
(A) Mental age 
(B) Standardization 
(C) Insight 
(D) Savant syndrome 
(E) Imprinting 
25. According to the diathesis-stress model of 
schizophrenia, which of the following is true  
of a person with a genetic predisposition for 
developing schizophrenia? 
(A) The person will definitely develop and show 
the disorder. 
(B) The person has a mother who has been 
diagnosed with schizophrenia. 
(C) The person will develop symptoms of the 
disorder during young adulthood. 
(D) The person has a high level of dopamine 
activity. 
(E) The person has an increased likelihood of 
developing the disorder during a period of 
major life changes. 
 
26. Nick is smiling even though he does not feel 
happy. After a short time he feels happier. The 
best explanation for Nick’s change in mood is 
(A) justification of effort 
(B) facial feedback 
(C) bottom-up processing 
(D) selective encoding 
(E) homeostasis 
27. Children of authoritative parents tend to be 
(A) immature 
(B) indecisive  
(C) independent 
(D) withdrawn 
(E) aggressive 
The figure presents a histogram. The horizontal axis is labeled “I Q Score,” and the numbers 70 through 145, in increments of 15, are indicated. The vertical axis is labeled “Frequency,” and the numbers 0 through 10, in increments of 2, are indicated. The histogram has 11 bars. The data presented by the bars are as follows. Note that all values are approximate. 
Bar 1. I Q Score, 72 to 76. Frequency, 3.
Bar 2. I Q Score, 77 to 81. Frequency, 1.
Bar 3. I Q Score, 82 to 86. Frequency, 3.
Bar 4. I Q Score, 87 to 91. Frequency, 2.
Bar 5. I Q Score, 92 to 96. Frequency, 10.
Bar 6. I Q Score, 97 to 101. Frequency, 10.
Bar 7. I Q Score, 102 to 106. Frequency, 8.
Bar 8. I Q Score, 107 to 111. Frequency, 2.
Bar 9. I Q Score, 112 to 116. Frequency, 8.
Bar 10. I Q Score, 117 to 121. Frequency, 1.
Bar 11. I Q Score, 132 to 136. Frequency, 2.
There are no bars for the I Q Score ranges of 122 to 126, and 127 to 131.

A curve is drawn over the histogram. The curve begins on the vertical axis, slightly above the origin, and moves gradually upward and to the right for a short period of time. It then moves steeply upward and to the right until it reaches a maximum at an I Q score of approximately 100, with a frequency of just under 8. At this point, the curve begins to move downward and to the right. It moves steeply at first, and then begins to gradually level off as it approaches the horizontal axis. The curve ends on the horizontal axis at an I Q score of 145.
28. A psychologist administered the most recent 
edition of the Stanford-Binet I Q test to  
50 students and their scores are shown in the chart 
above. How many students earned scores higher 
than two standard deviations above the mean? 
(A)  2 
(B)  3 
(C)  8 
(D) 10 
(E) 20 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-8- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
Questions 29 through 32 are based on the following. 
Karl goes to see Dr. Norton to help him overcome 
his fear of cats. Karl’s fear began in childhood when 
he petted a cat and someone slammed a door. Every 
time Karl petted the cat, the door slammed. Now 
whenever Karl sees a cat, he becomes very anxious.  
29. Karl’s fear of cats is classified as 
(A) obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(B) panic disorder 
(C) a specific phobia 
(D) generalized anxiety disorder 
(E) conversion disorder 
30. In the development of Karl’s fear of cats, what 
was the unconditioned stimulus U C S ? 
(A) Fear 
(B) The cat 
(C) The slamming of the door 
(D) The person who slammed the door 
(E) The room in which the door slamming took 
place 
31. Dr. Norton puts a cat in the room with Karl and 
prevents Karl from avoiding or escaping the cat 
until Karl’s anxiety naturally dissipates. The 
treatment is called 
(A) systematic desensitization 
(B) participant modeling 
(C) aversion therapy 
(D) counterconditioning 
(E) flooding 
32. Karl may have been reluctant to try therapy to 
change his fear because he believes that his efforts 
to change are ineffective. This would indicate that 
Karl has low 
(A) self-esteem 
(B) self-regulation 
(C) self-perception 
(D) self-efficacy 
(E) self-concept 
33. Which of the following scenarios best  
exemplifies practical intelligence as suggested  
by Robert Sternberg’s triarchic theory? 
(A) A child becomes an accomplished dancer. 
(B) A student achieves high scores  
on the math and language portions of  
a standardized exam. 
(C) A club president devises a way to publicize 
important upcoming events. 
(D) A student composes a new song. 
(E) A child has few social skills but an unusually 
strong memory. 
34. Which of the following is NOT a product of 
learning? 
(A) Slowing down to avoid getting a ticket 
(B) Squinting in bright light 
(C) Doing chores in order to receive money 
(D) Getting acclimated to the frequent sound  
of trains going past one’s house 
(E) Becoming afraid of dogs after being bitten  
by a dog 
35. The process of converting incoming physical 
energy into a neural code that can be processed  
is called 
(A) transduction 
(B) sensory threshold 
(C) sensory adaptation 
(D) parallel processing 
(E) transferred excitation 
36. Jorgas struggles with meeting new people. He is 
very shy and does not approach people at social 
events. Because of this, people assume he does 
not want to talk to them and they avoid him, 
which in turn reinforces Jorgas’ anxiety about 
approaching people. Jorgas’ situation illustrates 
which of the following principles?  
(A) Locus of control 
(B) Reciprocal determinism 
(C) Implicit personality theory 
(D) Learned helplessness 
(E) Modeling 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-9- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
37. The type of intelligence that Howard Gardner 
described as individuals’ abilities to understand 
themselves and to be aware of their talents and 
limitations is 
(A) naturalistic 
(B) interpersonal 
(C) kinesthetic 
(D) intrapersonal 
(E) g 
38. Janie is successful with word games that require 
her to create words out of a series of letters. 
Which of the following combinations most likely 
contributes to her success? 
(A) Linguistic intelligence and a mental set 
(B) Linguistic intelligence and heuristics 
(C) Spatial intelligence and functional fixedness 
(D) Spatial intelligence and heuristics 
(E) Spatial intelligence and a mental set 
39. Steve’s cat used to run away from loud music. 
Over time the cat stopped running away from  
the sound. Which of the following processes has 
occurred? 
(A) Classical conditioning 
(B) Habituation 
(C) Generalization 
(D) Operant conditioning 
(E) Sensitization 
40. The Barnum effect in psychological assessment 
refers to 
(A) when there is insufficient statistical support 
to confirm a test’s reliability 
(B) the tendency of individuals to accept vague 
personality descriptions as accurate 
(C) when an interviewee demonstrates a 
consistently negative response set 
(D) the influence of an interviewer’s personal 
bias on the outcome of an interview 
(E) the influence of distracting test conditions  
on a test taker’s performance 
Questions 41 through 42 are based on the following. 
The figure presents a diagram of the ear. In the diagram, five parts are labeled A through E. The outer ear is shown on the left side of the diagram. A narrow tube extends rightward from the center of the outer ear until it reaches a circular part labeled E. A tube extends from the right side of the part labeled E, and moves downward and to the right. This tube is labeled C. Just above the part labeled E, is a nodule shaped part labeled A. To the right of part A are 3 ring shaped parts, which are collectively labeled B. Below part B, is a swirl shaped part, which is labeled D.
41. Which of the following structures is part of the 
vestibular system? 
(A) A 
(B) B 
(C) C 
(D) D 
(E) E 
42. The area labeled A contains the 
(A) auditory nerves 
(B) pinna 
(C) ossicles 
(D) cochlea 
(E) semi-circular canals 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-10- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
43. Jack performed well on the most recent math test. 
When asked why he performed well, Jack said it 
was because of his high level of ability. Jerry 
performed poorly on the same test. When asked 
why, Jerry said that the test was unfair. These 
attitudes illustrate 
(A) the self-serving bias 
(B) self-efficacy 
(C) learned helplessness 
(D) the fundamental attribution error 
(E) role-playing 
44. During her psychotherapy sessions, Justine finds 
that her therapist often paraphrases what she has 
said, asks for clarification, and seems to 
understand her feelings. The therapist’s  
approach is most consistent with that of 
(A) Carl Rogers 
(B) Sigmund Freud 
(C) Albert Ellis 
(D) Erik Erikson 
(E) Fritz Perls 
45. In the 1800s, the activist Dorothea Dix led a 
movement in support of 
(A) using introspection as a therapeutic procedure 
(B) eliminating the policy of 
deinstitutionalization 
(C) adopting the belief that mental disorders 
occur when people fail to conform to 
society’s expectations 
(D) outlawing the practice of surgical lobotomy  
(E) improving the treatment of patients with 
mental disorders who were housed in 
asylums 
46. Which of the following regions of the body has 
the largest area of sensory cortex devoted to it? 
(A) Trunk 
(B) Arm 
(C) Shoulder 
(D) Leg 
(E) Face 
47. Dora alternates between periods of  
extreme euphoria, when she is very talkative, 
overconfident, and hyperactive, and times of 
profound sadness, when she experiences feelings 
of hopelessness. Which of the following disorders 
is Dora most likely exhibiting? 
(A) Borderline personality 
(B) Major depressive 
(C) Bipolar 
(D) Generalized anxiety 
(E) Schizophrenia 
48. A four-year-old child frequently pulled on  
the dog’s tail to gain attention. To reduce this 
undesirable behavior, the parent took away one 
hour of television viewing every time the child 
pulled the dog’s tail. Within one week, the 
undesirable behavior was significantly reduced. 
The above scenario illustrates 
(A) positive reinforcement 
(B) negative reinforcement 
(C) negative punishment  
(D) positive punishment 
(E) extinction 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-11- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
49. Even though Eli prefers romantic comedy movies, 
he often goes to action-adventure movies to fit in 
with his friends. Eli’s behavior can best be 
explained by 
(A) the reciprocity norm 
(B) obedience 
(C) normative social influence 
(D) informational social influence 
(E) companionate love 
50. The network of structures involved in emotion, 
motivation, and memory is the 
(A) limbic system 
(B) pons 
(C) corpus callosum 
(D) occipital lobe 
(E) parietal lobe 
51. Initially, intelligence quotients were calculated on 
the basis of a person’s mental and chronological 
ages. Using that approach, a person with a mental 
age of 12 and an intelligence score of 120 would 
have a chronological age of 
(A) 10 
(B) 12 
(C) 14 
(D) 16 
(E) 18 
52. Which of the following neurotransmitters is most 
closely associated with schizophrenia? 
(A) Norepinephrine 
(B) Acetylcholine 
(C) Glutamate 
(D) Dopamine 
(E) Serotonin 
53. Which of the following structures is most closely 
associated with communication between the 
central nervous system and the endocrine system? 
(A) Cerebellum 
(B) Amygdala 
(C) Medulla 
(D) Reticular activating system 
(E) Hypothalamus 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-12- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
Questions 54 through 56 are based on the following. 
A group of psychologists wanted to develop  
an intelligence test that would be quicker to 
administer than the one they were using, which  
was a standardized test that required answering as 
many questions correctly as possible in a given time. 
The existing test was considered valid and reliable.  
In the psychologists’ new test, participants had to  
find an image hidden in a visual display as quickly  
as possible. The psychologists collected data to 
determine the relation between the number of items 
the participants answered correctly on the original 
standardized test and the time it took them to spot the 
hidden image on the new test. The graph below 
displays the results. 
The figure presents a scatterplot in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled “Score on Standardized Test,” and the numbers 0, 70, 85, 110, 115, and 130 are indicated. The vertical axis is labeled “Score on New Test,” and the numbers 0, 5, 10, 15, and 20 are indicated. There are 26 points on the scatterplot. The points are spread out relatively evenly across the plane.
54. Based on the graph, which of the following would 
most likely be used to assess the relation between 
the participants’ scores on the two tests? 
(A) A t test 
(B) A correlation 
(C) Analysis of variance 
(D) Descriptive statistics 
(E) Factor analysis 
55. Which of the following values best represents the 
value of the statistic associated with the graph? 
(A) negative 0.50
(B)  0.00 
(C)  1.00 
(D)  1.96 
(E)  3.00 
56. Which of the following is a valid conclusion that 
the researchers could have drawn from the data? 
(A) The measurement from the new test is likely 
to be better than the measurement from the 
original test. 
(B) The new test provides information on 
intelligence that is highly comparable to  
that provided by the original test. 
(C) The new test produces scores that are 
generally unrelated to those produced by  
the original test. 
(D) The new test is likely to be biased in favor  
of disadvantaged groups. 
(E) Intelligence is too abstract a concept to 
measure accurately. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-13- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
57. Which of the following perspectives suggests that 
depression is due to the unconscious conflicts and 
hostile feelings that originate in early childhood? 
(A) Biological 
(B) Behavioral 
(C) Psychoanalytic 
(D) Cognitive 
(E) Sociocultural 
58. Which of the following is a disease in which the 
immune system attacks the myelin of neurons in 
the central nervous system? 
(A) Parkinson's disease 
(B) Multiple sclerosis 
(C) Schizophrenia 
(D) Epilepsy 
(E) Rett syndrome 
 
59. Which part of the brain represented above is  
indicated by A? 
(A) Cerebellum 
(B) Prefrontal cortex 
(C) Somatosensory cortex 
(D) Wernicke’s area 
(E) Broca’s area 
60. Isaac’s father offers to give him five dollars for 
every good grade he earns on his report card. 
Which of the following is a type of motivation 
being used by Isaac’s father? 
(A) Drive reduction 
(B) Instinct 
(C) Intrinsic 
(D) Incentive 
(E) Humanistic 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-14- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
61. During the high-wire act, Grace walks along a 
rope suspended 30 feet above the circus floor. 
Which of the following is most involved in 
helping Grace coordinate her movements and 
maintain her balance during the performance? 
(A) Cerebellum 
(B) Hypothalamus 
(C) Hippocampus 
(D) Sympathetic nervous system 
(E) Parasympathetic nervous system 
62. Of the following, which would most commonly 
be used to treat a phobia? 
(A) Antipsychotic medication 
(B) Aversive conditioning 
(C) Systematic desensitization 
(D) Token economy 
(E) Group therapy 
63. Which of the following psychological approaches 
suggests that jealousy might serve an adaptive 
function in protecting a sexual relationship from 
threats? 
(A) Cognitive 
(B) Behavioral 
(C) Psychodynamic 
(D) Evolutionary 
(E) Humanistic 
64. Laura is in transition from Erik Erikson’s industry 
versus inferiority stage into the identity versus 
role confusion stage. Which of the following is 
most likely what Laura is experiencing? 
(A) She is less affected by self-esteem and more 
interested in initiative. 
(B) She is more concerned with autonomy than 
feelings of guilt. 
(C) She is less interested in accomplishing things 
and more interested in defining herself. 
(D) She is more affected by matters of trust and is 
not spending much time thinking, “Am I 
good or bad?” 
(E) She is more interested in doing things for 
herself than relying on others. 
65. After listening to a radio station play the same  
set of songs every three hours, Ivan grows to like 
them. Ivan’s reaction can be best explained by 
(A) frequency theory 
(B) functional fixedness 
(C) the central route to persuasion 
(D) the mere-exposure effect 
(E) the phi phenomenon 
Questions 66 through 67 are based on the following. 
In a two-phase study, participants were randomly 
assigned to either group A or group B. All 
participants were subjected to a series of irritating  
air puffs directed at the face. In the first phase of the 
study, participants in group A pressed a button that 
stopped the air puffs. Participants in group B pressed 
a button that had no effect on the air puffs. In the 
second phase of the study, both groups had buttons 
that, if pressed, would stop the air puffs. 
66. The study most directly explores the concept of 
(A) learned helplessness 
(B) social facilitation 
(C) retrograde amnesia 
(D) the mere-exposure effect 
(E) regression to the mean 
67. Which of the following disorders is hypothesized 
to result most frequently from real-world 
conditions that are similar to those used in the 
study? 
(A) Autism spectrum 
(B) Bipolar 
(C) Dependent personality 
(D) Major depressive 
(E) Obsessive-compulsive 
68. In order to get more audience participation, a 
radio show offers a prize to the first person to  
call the show at the beginning of every hour. The 
show is using which of the following schedules  
of reinforcement? 
(A) Continuous 
(B) Fixed ratio 
(C) Fixed interval 
(D) Variable ratio 
(E) Variable interval 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-15- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
The figure presents a line graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled “Number of Others Presumed Available to Help,” and the numbers 1, 2, 3, and 4 are indicated. The vertical axis is labeled “Percent Attempting to Help Confederate in Trouble,” and the numbers 0 through 100, in increments of 10, are indicated. The following five points are indicated along the line.
Point 1. 0 comma 85.
Point 2. 1 comma 60.
Point 3. 2 comma 50.
Point 4. 3 comma 40.
Point 5. 4 comma 30.
69. The above diagram illustrates which of the 
following psychological concepts? 
(A) Fundamental attribution error 
(B) Reciprocity norm 
(C) Deindividuation 
(D) Social trap 
(E) Bystander effect 
70. The Thematic Apperception Test T A T is based 
on the hypothesis that when a person interprets an 
ambiguous picture, that person is 
(A) expressing unique sensory processes 
(B) generating objective measurements that are 
more effective than subjective measures in 
assessing personality 
(C) projecting an internal psychological state 
onto an external stimulus 
(D) showing the effects of patterns of positive 
and negative reinforcement 
(E) providing information regarding one’s own 
level of creativity 
71. Harry Harlow’s experiments with rhesus  
monkeys and surrogate mothers demonstrate  
the importance of 
(A) socialization to neural development 
(B) environmental stimulation to cognitive 
development 
(C) contact comfort to attachment 
(D) imprinting to observational learning 
(E) instincts to reproductive habits 
72. Denny does not have wrapping paper to use to 
wrap a birthday present, and so he decides to use 
colorful newspaper comics instead. Denny’s 
solution demonstrates that he has overcome 
(A) functional fixedness 
(B) the fundamental attribution error 
(C) cognitive dissonance 
(D) egocentrism 
(E) a self-serving bias 
73. The fovea has the greatest visual acuity in bright 
light primarily because the fovea is 
(A) near the center of the visual field 
(B) close to the lens 
(C) not close to the blind spot 
(D) an extension of the frontal lobe 
(E) made up of only cones 
74. When Amy was seven years of age, she had a 
babysitter from France. During this time Amy 
learned to speak a little French. Years later,  
when Amy got to college, she signed up for a 
beginning French class. Amy learned the material 
in her French class much more quickly than her 
classmates did. Amy’s rapid learning was most 
likely due to 
(A) implicit memory 
(B) episodic memory 
(C) spontaneous recovery 
(D) deductive reasoning 
(E) fluid intelligence 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-16- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
75. After Sharon stares at a patch of saturated  
green color for a brief period of time, she  
looks at a white surface and sees a red patch  
of color. This perceptual phenomenon is best 
explained by 
(A) retinal disparity 
(B) color constancy 
(C) selective attention 
(D) trichromatic theory 
(E) opponent-process theory 
76. Which of the following relates most to the lowest 
level of Abraham Maslow’s hierarchy of needs? 
(A) Social affiliation  
(B) Self-actualization 
(C) Fight-or-flight response 
(D) Intrinsic motivation 
(E) Drive reduction 
77. A common psychological effect of alcohol  
intake is 
(A) reduced inhibition 
(B) anxiety 
(C) enhanced memory 
(D) psychosis 
(E) heightened creativity 
78. A child whose family owns a dog may refer to 
any four-legged animal as “dog.” In learning 
theory, such behavior is known as 
(A) stimulus generalization 
(B) operant conditioning 
(C) classical conditioning 
(D) ecological validity 
(E) shaping 
79. Which of the following is an individual more 
likely to do when working in a group? 
(A) Provide needed help to a stranger 
(B) Increase effort on a project 
(C) Endorse an opinion with low popularity 
among group members 
(D) Make a cautious, low-risk decision 
(E) Show a decline in work output 
80. A 40-year-old man and his 7-year-old son move 
to a country where they have to learn a new 
language. Compared with his son, the 40-year-old 
man will 
(A) have more difficulty learning to produce 
phonemes that do not exist in his native 
language 
(B) require less active processing to acquire the 
syntax of the new language 
(C) overregularize more often 
(D) learn the grammar of the new language more 
slowly but ultimately acquire the language 
better 
(E) learn new vocabulary at a faster rate by using 
techniques such as fast mapping 
81. Lisa is a college English major. She believes all 
math majors are analytical, logical, and serious. 
Lisa seems to be demonstrating 
(A) group polarization 
(B) ingroup bias
(C) the actor-observer effect 
(D) outgroup homogeneity bias 
(E) stereotype threat 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-17- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
82. Because he is afraid of public speaking, Scott 
withdraws from a class that requires an oral 
presentation and enrolls in another class without  
a presentation requirement. He continues the 
pattern, switching classes each semester to avoid 
giving presentations. Scott’s behavior has been 
(A) positively reinforced 
(B) negatively reinforced 
(C) punished 
(D) weakened 
(E) classically conditioned 
83. Which of the following behaviors best 
demonstrates an emotional response associated 
with the short route from the thalamus to the 
amygdala, as described by Joseph LeDoux? 
(A) Sherry receives a high score on an exam and 
jumps up and down in celebration. 
(B) Miguel jumps up on a chair because he thinks 
he sees something moving along the wall. 
When he realizes it was just a dust ball, he 
gets off the chair. 
(C) Hannah has seen her mother crying at 
greeting card commercials, so now Hannah 
always cries whenever she sees a greeting 
card commercial. 
(D) As Charulata approaches her front door, she 
hears a rustle in the bushes. She sees the tail 
of a cat sticking out of the bushes, so she 
calmly walks into the house. 
(E) While waiting for a concert to begin, the 
crowd gets rowdy, so Anna joins in the 
rowdy behavior and begins to shout. 
84. Which of the following is the best evidence that 
social interaction is preprogrammed in humans 
and does not need to be learned? 
(A) Newborns turn their heads if their cheeks are 
stroked. 
(B) Newborns prefer sweet over bitter tastes. 
(C) Newborns are born with the Moro reflex. 
(D) Newborns focus longer on pictures of typical 
faces than on ones that show faces with 
jumbled features. 
(E) Newborns’ development is proximodistal. 
85. Eleven-month-old Jason drops a toy from his crib. 
He immediately looks over the side of the crib to 
search for the toy. Jason’s behavior demonstrates 
that he has acquired 
(A) conservation 
(B) habituation 
(C) dishabituation 
(D) object permanence 
(E) a zone of proximal development 
86. Melinda went skydiving. As soon as she landed, a 
handsome man helped her gather her parachute. 
Melinda’s heart was beating quickly and her 
hands were perspiring. Melinda inferred that she 
must be attracted to him. Which of the following 
is a theory of emotion that would best explain the 
relationship between Melinda’s physiological 
state and her apparent attraction to the man that 
helped her? 
(A) Cannon-Bard 
(B) James-Lange 
(C) Arousal 
(D) Schachter two-factor 
(E) Social exchange 
87. The difficulty many people have recalling the 
details of common objects such as pennies can  
best be explained by 
(A) interference 
(B) memory decay 
(C) repression 
(D) a lack of encoding 
(E) amnesia 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-18- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
88. Four-year-old Craig understands that birds build 
nests in trees. In his front yard, Craig notices an 
unusually large nest. He is scared to go near it, 
fearing that some large bird may attack him. 
Craig’s father explains to him that squirrels also 
build nests and that the nest in the front yard  
is that of a squirrel. Craig changes his thinking  
to now include the fact that squirrels build nests. 
Jean Piaget would say that Craig’s new way of 
thinking about nests is an example of 
(A) insight 
(B) accommodation 
(C) an algorithm 
(D) a heuristic 
(E) conservation 
89. Nervousness can result in faster and more shallow 
breathing as well as a racing heart. This is due to 
activation of the  
(A) somatic nervous system 
(B) parasympathetic nervous system 
(C) sympathetic nervous system 
(D) corpus callosum 
(E) cerebellum 
90. Which of the following brain regions is the part  
of the cerebral cortex that is most responsible for 
the processing of visual stimuli? 
(A) Parietal lobe 
(B) Temporal lobe 
(C) Frontal lobe 
(D) Occipital lobe 
(E) Medulla 
91. In Stanley Milgram’s classic studies of obedience, 
teachers in a staged experiment were instructed  
to administer shocks to learners when they made 
mistakes. A large percentage of the teachers 
obeyed the experimenter and administered strong 
levels of shock to the learners. When this 
experiment is described, most people judge  
the obedient participants to be aggressive, cold, 
and unappealing, and they fail to recognize the 
role of social forces in behavior. The mistaken 
judgment is due to 
(A) deindividuation 
(B) the fundamental attribution error 
(C) a self-serving bias 
(D) groupthink 
(E) psychological reactance 
92. Petunia experiences distress every time she leaves 
her house and goes out into a crowd. The most 
likely diagnosis for her would be which of the 
following types of disorders? 
(A) Anxiety 
(B) Somatic symptom and related 
(C) Neurodevelopmental 
(D) Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic 
(E) Personality 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-19- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
93. During a political debate, Candidate A expresses 
detailed facts on an important issue. Candidate B 
responds with an emotional appeal on the same 
issue. Which method of persuasion is each of the 
candidates using? 
(A) Candidate A is using the peripheral route, and 
Candidate B is using the central route. 
(B) Candidate A is using the peripheral route, and 
Candidate B is using the door-in-the-face 
technique. 
(C) Candidate A is using the central route, and 
Candidate B is using the peripheral route. 
(D) Candidate A is using the central route, and 
Candidate B is using the foot-in-the-door 
technique. 
(E) Candidate A is using the foot-in-the-door 
technique, and Candidate B is using the 
peripheral route. 
94. The argument over the relative contributions of 
heredity and environment in the development of 
various behaviors and personality traits is known 
as which of the following controversies? 
(A) Continuous versus discrete 
(B) Nature versus nurture 
(C) Active versus passive 
(D) Critical period versus sensitive period 
(E) Ages versus stages 
95. In legal cases, Elizabeth Loftus’ research on the 
misinformation effect is most often used to cast 
doubt on which of the following? 
(A) The knowledge of expert witnesses 
(B) The judgment of jurors 
(C) The memory of eyewitnesses 
(D) The impartiality of judges 
(E) The intelligence of attorneys 
96. While attending a concert, Anthony finds that he 
can clearly recognize the melody coming from  
the lead violin above all the other instruments 
playing in the orchestra, even though the other 
instruments may be louder. Gestalt psychologists 
would explain Anthony’s ability using the 
principle of 
(A) figure-ground 
(B) closure 
(C) simplicity 
(D) constancy 
(E) proximity 
97. When Joe arrives at the library, he can choose 
from any of several strategies that might help him 
find the book he needs. He could examine all the 
books on every shelf, and be certain that he would 
eventually find the book he wants, but this 
strategy would take too long. Joe decides instead 
to ask a librarian to direct him to the appropriate 
section of the library. Joe is using 
(A) fixation 
(B) a mental set 
(C) a prototype 
(D) a heuristic 
(E) an algorithm 
98. Which of the following is an example of a strong 
negative correlation? 
(A)The figure presents a scatterplot consisting of 10 data points. The points begin near the origin and trend upward and to the right, almost in a straight line.
(B)The figure presents a scatterplot consisting of 25 data points. The points are spread out relatively evenly across the scatterplot.
(C)The figure presents a scatterplot consisting of 13 data points. The points begin near the top of the vertical axis and trend downward and to the right, almost in a straight line.
(D)The figure presents a scatterplot consisting of 24 data points. The points begin near the middle of the vertical axis and trend horizontally to the right in a band like fashion. The points are very closely packed together.
(E) The figure presents a scatterplot consisting of 27 data points. The points begin near the origin and trend upward and to the right in a band like fashion. The points are very closely packed together.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

-20- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
99. James takes anI Q test when he is in third grade 
and receives a score of 112. When he is tested 
again in sixth grade with an alternate version of 
the same test, his score is 114. The fact that the 
two scores are very similar most directly indicates 
that the I Q test is 
(A) valid 
(B) reliable 
(C) biased 
(D) standardized 
(E) accurate 
100. Which of the following techniques will a  
person-centered therapist most likely use? 
(A) Systematic desensitization 
(B) Free association 
(C) Unconditional positive regard 
(D) Dream analysis 
(E) Rational-emotive behavior therapy 
END OF SECTION I 
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, YOU MAY  
CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS SECTION. 
DO NOT GO ON TO SECTION II UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE DONE THE FOLLOWING. 
• 
• 
• 
PLACED YOUR AP NUMBER LABEL ON YOUR ANSWER SHEET 
WRITTEN AND GRIDDED YOUR AP NUMBER CORRECTLY ON YOUR  
ANSWER SHEET 
TAKEN THE AP EXAM LABEL FROM THE FRONT OF THIS BOOKLET  
AND PLACED IT ON YOUR ANSWER SHEET  


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Section II: Free-Response Questions 
This is the free-response section of the 2018 AP Exam.  
It includes cover material and other administrative instructions 
to help familiarize students with the mechanics of the exam. 
(Note that future exams may differ in look from the following content.) 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Psychology Exam 
2018 
SECTION II: Free Response 
DO NOT OPEN THIS BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
At a Glance 
Total Time 
50 minutes 
Number of Questions 
2 
Percent of Total Score 
33.3% 
Writing Instrument 
Pen with black or dark 
blue ink 
Weight 
The questions are 
weighted equally. 
Instructions 
The questions for Section II are printed in this booklet. You may use page 3 and the 
unlined pages of this booklet to organize your answers and fo r scratch work, but you must 
write your answers on the lined pages provided for each ques tion. Begin each answer on 
the lined page facing the question. The questions are repeate d for your convenience. 
Write clearly and legibly. Do not skip lines. Cross out any err ors you make; crossed-out 
work will not be scored. 
Manage your time carefully. Divide your time about equally between the two questions. 
You may proceed freely from one question to the next. You may review your responses if 
you finish before the end of the exam is announced. 
Form I 
Form Code 4OBP4-S
85 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
-3- 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS.  
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.  
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
Question 1 begins on page 4. 
Question 2 begins on page 12. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-4- 
PSYCHOLOGY 
SECTION II 
Time—50 minutes 
Percent of total score—th i
r ty three and one third
Directions:  You have 50 minutes to answer BOTH of the following questions. It is not enough to answer a question 
by merely listing facts. You should present a cogent argument based on your critical analysis of the questions posed, 
using appropriate psychological terminology. 
 1. Max is making a holiday meal this year for his three sisters and himself because their parents will be out of town. 
He is trying to cook the special dishes his mother makes each year, but with his own unique style. 
Part A 
Explain how each of the following could help Max in making the meal. 
 
 
 
 
Divergent thinking 
Intrinsic motivation 
Episodic memory 
Olfactory bulb 
Part B
Explain how each of the following could hinder Max in making the meal. 
 
 
 
Divided attention 
Difference threshold 
Gender roles 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS. 
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-5- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 1. Max is making a holiday meal this year for his three sisters and himself because their parents will be out of town. 
He is trying to cook the special dishes his mother makes each year, but with his own unique style. 
 
  Part A 
 
Explain how each of the following could help Max in making the meal. 
 Divergent thinking 
 Intrinsic motivation 
 Episodic memory 
 Olfactory bulb 
 
  Part B 
 
Explain how each of the following could hinder Max in making the meal. 
 Divided attention 
 Difference threshold 
 Gender roles 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-6- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-7- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 1. Max is making a holiday meal this year for his three sisters and himself because their parents will be out of town. 
He is trying to cook the special dishes his mother makes each year, but with his own unique style. 
 
  Part A 
 
Explain how each of the following could help Max in making the meal. 
 Divergent thinking 
 Intrinsic motivation 
 Episodic memory 
 Olfactory bulb 
 
  Part B 
 
Explain how each of the following could hinder Max in making the meal. 
 Divided attention 
 Difference threshold 
 Gender roles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-8- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-9- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 1. Max is making a holiday meal this year for his three sisters and himself because their parents will be out of town. 
He is trying to cook the special dishes his mother makes each year, but with his own unique style. 
 
  Part A 
 
Explain how each of the following could help Max in making the meal. 
 Divergent thinking 
 Intrinsic motivation 
 Episodic memory 
 Olfactory bulb 
 
  Part B 
 
Explain how each of the following could hinder Max in making the meal. 
 Divided attention 
 Difference threshold 
 Gender roles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-10- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-11- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-12- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
 2. Mr. Smith is a new high school math teacher. Before the school year begins, he asks his colleagues to review  
a list of students in his class in an attempt to gather information about his incoming students. As he begins 
teaching, Mr. Smith struggles with managing student behavior in the classroom. In particular, he has difficulty 
helping his students focus on their assignments and cooperate during group work.  
Part A 
Explain how each of the following concepts might hinder Mr. Smith’s success in this scenario. 
 
 
Self-fulfilling prophecy 
Big Five trait of neuroticism 
Part B 
Explain how Mr. Smith might use each of the following to be more successful in managing his students’ 
behavior. 
 
 
 
Superordinate goals 
Metacognition 
Token economy 
Part C The figure presents the graph of a curve titled “Mr. Smith’s Class Performance” in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled “Scores,” and the vertical axis is labeled “Frequency.” The curve begins near the origin, and moves gradually upward and to the right for a short period of time. It then moves steeply upward and to the right until it reaches a point near the top of the vertical axis, approximately one fourth of the way along the horizontal axis. At this point, it begins to curve downward. It continues steeply downward and to the right, until it reaches a point about halfway up the vertical axis, halfway along the horizontal axis. A vertical dashed line labeled “Mean equals 70” is drawn at this point. At this point, it begins to curve upward. It continues steeply upward and to the right until it reaches a point near the top of the vertical axis, approximately three fourths of the way along the horizontal axis. At this point, it begins to curve downward again. It continues steeply downward and to the right, and then begins to gradually level off until it ends slightly above the horizontal axis.
The statewide results of a standardized math test had a normal distribution and a mean of 70. Mr. Smith’s 
students took the same test and the graph above depicts their results. 
 
 
What does the mean score of Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are performing 
relative to the state scores? 
What does the distribution of scores in Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are 
performing relative to the state scores?
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS. 
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-13- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Question 2 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 2. Mr. Smith is a new high school math teacher. Before the school year begins, he asks his colleagues to review  
a list of students in his class in an attempt to gather information about his incoming students. As he begins 
teaching, Mr. Smith struggles with managing student behavior in the classroom. In particular, he has difficulty 
helping his students focus on their assignments and cooperate during group work.  
 
  Part A 
Explain how each of the following concepts might hinder Mr. Smith’s success in this scenario. 
 Self-fulfilling prophecy 
 Big Five trait of neuroticism 
 
  Part B 
Explain how Mr. Smith might use each of the following to be more successful in managing his students’ 
behavior. 
 Superordinate goals 
 Metacognition 
 Token economy 
 
  Part C 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-14- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
The statewide results of a standardized math test had a normal distribution and a mean of 70. Mr. Smith’s 
students took the same test and the graph above depicts their results. 
 What does the mean score of Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are performing 
relative to the state scores? 
 What does the distribution of scores in Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are 
performing relative to the state scores?
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-15- 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Question 2 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 2. Mr. Smith is a new high school math teacher. Before the school year begins, he asks his colleagues to review  
a list of students in his class in an attempt to gather information about his incoming students. As he begins 
teaching, Mr. Smith struggles with managing student behavior in the classroom. In particular, he has difficulty 
helping his students focus on their assignments and cooperate during group work.  
 
  Part A 
Explain how each of the following concepts might hinder Mr. Smith’s success in this scenario. 
 Self-fulfilling prophecy 
 Big Five trait of neuroticism 
 
  Part B 
Explain how Mr. Smith might use each of the following to be more successful in managing his students’ 
behavior. 
 Superordinate goals 
 Metacognition 
 Token economy 
 
  Part C 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-16- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
The statewide results of a standardized math test had a normal distribution and a mean of 70. Mr. Smith’s 
students took the same test and the graph above depicts their results. 
 What does the mean score of Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are performing 
relative to the state scores? 
 What does the distribution of scores in Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are 
performing relative to the state scores? 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-17- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
Question 2 is reprinted for your convenience. 
 
 2. Mr. Smith is a new high school math teacher. Before the school year begins, he asks his colleagues to review  
a list of students in his class in an attempt to gather information about his incoming students. As he begins 
teaching, Mr. Smith struggles with managing student behavior in the classroom. In particular, he has difficulty 
helping his students focus on their assignments and cooperate during group work.  
 
  Part A 
Explain how each of the following concepts might hinder Mr. Smith’s success in this scenario. 
 Self-fulfilling prophecy 
 Big Five trait of neuroticism 
 
  Part B 
Explain how Mr. Smith might use each of the following to be more successful in managing his students’ 
behavior. 
 Superordinate goals 
 Metacognition 
 Token economy 
 
  Part C 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-18- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
The statewide results of a standardized math test had a normal distribution and a mean of 70. Mr. Smith’s 
students took the same test and the graph above depicts their results. 
 What does the mean score of Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are performing 
relative to the state scores? 
 What does the distribution of scores in Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are 
performing relative to the state scores?
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-19- 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
-20- 
STOP 
END OF EXAM 
 
 
THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS APPLY TO THE COVERS OF THE  
SECTION II BOOKLET. 
• 
• 
• 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE COMPLETED THE IDENTIFICATION  
INFORMATION AS REQUESTED ON THE FRONT AND BACK  
COVERS OF THE SECTION II BOOKLET. 
CHECK TO SEE THAT YOUR AP NUMBER LABEL APPEARS IN  
THE BOX ON THE COVER. 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE USED THE SAME SET OF AP  
NUMBER LABELS ON ALL AP EXAMS YOU HAVE TAKEN  
THIS YEAR. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Multiple-Choice Answer Key 
The following contains the answers to 
the multiple-choice questions in this exam. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Answer Key for AP Psychology 
Practice Exam, Section I 
Question 1: A 
Question 2: C 
Question 3: A 
Question 4: A 
Question 5: D 
Question 6: A 
Question 7: C 
Question 8: B 
Question 9: A 
Question 10: C 
Question 11: B 
Question 12: B 
Question 13: A 
Question 14: C 
Question 15: D 
Question 16: D 
Question 17: B 
Question 18: C 
Question 19: C 
Question 20: B 
Question 21: C 
Question 22: D 
Question 23: D 
Question 24: D 
Question 25: E 
Question 26: B 
Question 27: C 
Question 28: A 
Question 29: C 
Question 30: C 
Question 31: E 
Question 32: D 
Question 33: C 
Question 34: B 
Question 35: A 
Question 36: B 
Question 37: D 
Question 38: B 
Question 39: B 
Question 40: B 
Question 41: B 
Question 42: C 
Question 43: A 
Question 44: A 
Question 45: E 
Question 46: E 
Question 47: C 
Question 48: C 
Question 49: C 
Question 50: A 
Question 51: A 
Question 52: D 
Question 53: E 
Question 54: B 
Question 55: B 
Question 56: C 
Question 57: C 
Question 58: B 
Question 59: C 
Question 60: D 
Question 61: A 
Question 62: C 
Question 63: D 
Question 64: C 
Question 65: D 
Question 66: A 
Question 67: D 
Question 68: C 
Question 69: E 
Question 70: C 
Question 71: C 
Question 72: A 
Question 73: E 
Question 74: A 
Question 75: E 
Question 76: E 
Question 77: A 
Question 78: A 
Question 79: E 
Question 80: A 
Question 81: D 
Question 82: B 
Question 83: B 
Question 84: D 
Question 85: D 
Question 86: D 
Question 87: D 
Question 88: B 
Question 89: C 
Question 90: D 
Question 91: B 
Question 92: A 
Question 93: C 
Question 94: B 
Question 95: C 
Question 96: A 
Question 97: D 
Question 98: C 
Question 99: B 
Question 100: C 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Free-Response Scoring Guidelines 
The following contains the scoring guidelines 
for the free-response questions in this exam. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2018 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 1 
Max is making a holiday meal this year for his three sisters and himself because their parents will be out of 
town. He is trying to cook the special dishes his mother makes each year, but with his own unique style. 
Part A 
Explain how each of the following could help Max in making the meal. 
• 
Divergent thinking 
• 
Intrinsic motivation 
• 
Episodic memory 
• 
Olfactory bulb 
Part B 
Explain how each of the following could hinder Max in making the meal. 
• 
Divided attention 
• 
Difference threshold 
• 
Gender roles 
General Considerations 
1. Answers should be presented in s entences and must be cogent enough for the meaning of the response 
to come through. Spelling and grammatical mistakes do not reduce the score of a response, but spelling 
must be close enough that the reader is convinced of the word. 
2. Do not score any notes made on the question section of the booklet. Score only what has been written  
in the blanks provided in the booklet. 
3. Definitions alone will not score, but they may be used to enhance the application. 
4. Within a point, a student will not be penalized for misinformation unless it directly contradicts correct 
information that would otherwise have scored a point. A correct application with an incorrect definition  
is not considered a direct contradiction and should score the point. 
5. Rubric examples provided for each point are not to be considered exhaustive. 
6. Responses that simply parrot or repeat the terms from the question will not score. 
7. A response can score a point only if it clearly conveys what part of the question is being answered.  
It is possible to infer what part of the question is being answered if it is consistent with the order  
of the question. 
© 2018 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2018 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 1 (continued) 
Part A 
Each response must indicate how the c
 oncept facilitates or otherwise h
 elps Max in any stage of  
meal preparation.  
Point 1: Divergent thinking 
Response must include text about Max being able to think of at least one specific novel alternative to some aspect 
of making the meal.  
• 
Score: “Max bought sweet potatoes to make a casserole. But he bought too many sweet potatoes and 
uses the extras to make ice cream, a smoothie, and salsa.” 
• 
Score: “Max uses a meat thermometer to stab open a can of olives, ventilate the potatoes before sticking 
them in the oven, and to pop a balloon to scare his sisters.” 
• 
Do NOT score “creativity” or “adding his own unique twist” without explicit mention of an 
unconventional use of some aspect of making the meal.  
Point 2: Intrinsic motivation 
Response must emphasize that Max is making the meal for reasons that cannot be considered external to Max.  
• 
Score: “Max enjoys cooking for internal reasons rather than external reasons.” 
• 
Score: “Max likes to cook because it is a naturally enjoyable activity to him.” 
• 
Do NOT score the overjustification effect.  
• 
Do NOT score extrinsic motivation.  
Point 3: Episodic memory 
Response must include text about a memory of an event in Max’s life that he was present for and that applies  
to this situation.  
• 
Score: “Max remembers watching his mom always puts bacon in the mashed potatoes, so he decides  
to do so as well.”  
• 
Score: “Having seen his sister get sick from yams last year, Max decides to make turnips for the side 
dish.” 
• 
Do NOT score semantic memory, implicit memory/nondeclarative memory, procedural memory 
• 
Do NOT score explicit memory unless it illustrates episodic memory specifically 
Point 4: Olfactory bulb 
Response must indicate that the olfactory bulb allows Max to smell, which helps him prepare the meal. 
• 
Score: “When Max smells the bacon starting to burn, he turns it over to cook on the other side.” 
• 
Score: “Max sniffs the milk to make sure it is still fresh. When it smells OK, he uses it in  
the mashed potatoes.” 
• 
Do NOT score other sensory experiences.  
© 2018 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2018 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 1 (continued) 
Part B 
Each response must indicate how the c
 oncept works to the detriment of or otherwise hurts Max’s cooking 
in any stage of meal preparation.  
Point 5: Divided attention 
Response must include something going wrong with the meal preparation because Max is paying attention  
to something other than what he needs to be paying attention to in order to make a quality meal.   
• 
Score: “His sisters are talking to Max so much that he accidentally sets the timer for 55 minutes instead 
of 25 minutes and the apple pie b
 urns in the oven.” 
• 
Score: “Max is trying to multitask by baking a pie while he cooks bacon so he fails to pay close enough 
attention to the bacon frying on the stove so it ends up burning to a crisp.” 
• 
Do NOT score selective attention. 
Point 6: Difference threshold 
Response must indicate that Max has difficulty distinguishing between two stimuli. Response can refer to the just 
noticeable difference.  
• 
Score: “Max has a tough time tasting the difference between a little and a lot of sugar, so he ends up 
putting too much into the sweet potato pie and it ends up tasting awful.” 
• 
Score: “Max chose an under ripe banana because he could not tell a green banana from  
a yellow banana.” 
• 
Do NOT score absolute threshold. 
• 
Do NOT score anything to do with signal detection theory. 
• 
Do NOT score Weber’s law without an example of a difference threshold in Max’s cooking. 
Point 7: Gender roles 
Response must mention how behaviors expected from men and/or women create problems for Max in making  
the meal.  
• 
Score: “Max’s sisters tease him, saying only girls are supposed to cook. The teasing angers him so he 
puts salt and pepper in t heir apple pie.” 
• 
Score: “Max realizes that his dad never does the holiday cooking, so he is afraid to ask for help making 
the m
 
eal because he thinks he will be laughed at for cooking.” 
• 
Do NOT score gender identity.  
• 
Do NOT score stereotype threat alone.  
© 2018 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2018 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 2 
Mr. Smith is a new high school math teacher. Before the school year begins, he asks his colleagues to review  
a list of students in his class in an attempt to gather information about his incoming students. As he begins 
teaching, Mr. Smith struggles with managing student behavior in the classroom. In particular, he has difficulty 
helping his students focus on their assignments and cooperate during group work.  
Part A 
Explain how each of the following concepts might hinder Mr. Smith’s success in this scenario. 
• Self-fulfilling prophecy 
• Big Five trait of neuroticism 
Part B 
Explain how Mr. Smith might use each of the following to be more successful in managing his 
students’ behavior. 
• Superordinate goals 
• Metacognition 
• Token economy 
© 2018 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2018 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 2 (continued) 
Part C 
The figure presents the graph of a curve titled “Mr. Smith’s Class Performance” in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled “Scores,” and the vertical axis is labeled “Frequency.” The curve begins near the origin, and moves gradually upward and to the right for a short period of time. It then moves steeply upward and to the right until it reaches a point near the top of the vertical axis, approximately one fourth of the way along the horizontal axis. At this point, it begins to curve downward. It continues steeply downward and to the right, until it reaches a point about halfway up the vertical axis, halfway along the horizontal axis. A vertical dashed line labeled “Mean equals 70” is drawn at this point. At this point, it begins to curve upward. It continues steeply upward and to the right until it reaches a point near the top of the vertical axis, approximately three fourths of the way along the horizontal axis. At this point, it begins to curve downward again. It continues steeply downward and to the right, and then begins to gradually level off until it ends slightly above the horizontal axis.
The statewide results of a standardized math test had a normal distribution and a mean of 70.  
Mr. Smith’s students took the same test and the graph above depicts their results. 
• What does the mean score of Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are performing 
relative to the state scores? 
• What does the distribution of scores in Mr. Smith’s class suggest about how well his students are 
performing relative to the state scores? 
General Considerations 
1. Answers should be presented in s entences and must be cogent enough for the meaning of the response 
to come through. Spelling and grammatical mistakes do not reduce the score of a response, but spelling 
must be close enough that the reader is convinced of the word. 
2. Do not score any notes made on the question section of the booklet. Score only what has been written  
in the blanks provided in the booklet. 
3. Definitions alone will not score, but they may be used to enhance the application. 
4. Within a point, a student will not be penalized for misinformation unless it directly contradicts correct 
information that would otherwise have scored a point. A correct application with an incorrect definition  
is not considered a direct contradiction and should score the point. 
5. Rubric examples provided for each point are not to b
 e considered exhaustive. 
6. Responses that simply parrot or repeat the terms from the question will not score. 
7. A response can score a point only if it clearly conveys what part of the question is being answered.  
It is possible to infer what part of the question is being answered if it is consistent with the order  
of the question. 
© 2018 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2018 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 2 (continued) 
Part A 
Each response must indicate how the concept works to HINDER Mr. Smith’s teaching OR student success 
in the class.  
Point 1: Self-fulfilling Prophecy 
Response must include all three components: 
(1) a belief or expectation about another person or group 
(2) an action or behavior consistent with that belief  
(3) AND leads to an outcome in that other person or group 
• 
Score: “Mr. Smith heard that Drew is a terrible student. So, Mr. Smith never asks Drew questions  
in class. This leads Drew to start skipping school.” 
• 
Score: “Mr. Smith thinks girls perform poorly in math. He is less attentive to the girls in his math  
class and the girls stop asking questions in math class.” 
• 
Do NOT score confirmation bias, hindsight bias, or availability heuristic without extension into  
the self-fulfilling prophecy. 
Point 2: Big Five Trait of Neuroticism 
Response must include a description of neuroticism for either Mr. Smith OR his students that interferes in some 
way with the class. 
Some acceptable words meaning neuroticism: unstable, emotional, unpredictable, anxious, volatile, insecure, 
worried, self-pitying, irritable, moody.  
• 
Score: “Mr. Smith’s anxiety about talking in front of students forces him to leave class suddenly, so the 
students start behaving unruly without a teacher present.”  
• 
Score: “Some of the students in Mr. Smith’s class are emotionally unstable, which makes it difficult for 
other students to pay attention in class.” 
Part B 
Each response must indicate how the concept makes Mr. Smith’s teaching more successful. 
Point 3: Superordinate Goals 
Response must describe a task assigned by Mr. Smith that requires joint rather than individual effort, which 
leads to better cooperation in the classroom. 
• 
Score: “Mr. Smith has students complete problems in groups, with each group member having to do one 
part of each problem. He finds students talk with each other about math more using this technique than 
with him lecturing.”  
• 
Score: “Mr. Smith says that if everyone gets at least 80% on the next quiz, he will cancel the final exam. 
So, the class studies together for the quiz, after which they start hanging out together after school and 
doing their homework together.”  
© 2018 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2018 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 2 (continued) 
Point 4: Metacognition 
Response must indicate that Mr. Smith examines, reflects, or otherwise evaluates his own thought processes  
to be a more effective teacher OR Mr. Smith encourages his students to use metacognition strategies. 
• 
Score: “Metacognition is getting the students to think about their own mental processes. Mr. Smith can 
ask the students why they are doing what they are doing so they can fix it internally and be self-aware  
of their actions, thus improving Mr. Smith’s success rate in his math courses.”  
• 
Score: “Mr. Smith reflects on his teaching every day after class so that he can improve what he does  
to facilitate his students’ learning.” 
Point 5: Token Economy 
Response must include students receiving tokens that can be exchanged for something students like for 
performing a desirable classroom behavior OR losing tokens that can be exchanged for something students 
like for performing an undesirable classroom behavior.  
• 
Score: “Mr. Smith gives a student a gold star every time they answer a question correctly in class. Stars 
can be exchanged for extra credit, candy, and pizza gift cards.”  
• 
Score: “Mr. Smith’s class has red chips which his students can use for extra lunch time. Mr. Smith takes 
away a student’s red chip if they speak out of turn in class.” 
Part C 
Point 6: Mean Score 
Response must accurately compare Mr. Smith’s class mean with the state mean. 
• 
Score: “Students in Mr. Smith’s class, on average, are performing at the same level as those across  
the state.” 
• 
Score: “There is no statistically significant difference between performance in Mr. Smith’s class and 
statewide because the averages are exactly the same.” 
Point 7: Distribution of Scores 
The response must indicate that there are more higher AND lower scores in Mr. Smith’s class than in the state 
OR that few students in Mr. Smith’s class scored at the statewide mean.  
• 
Score: “There were many scores above the statewide mean and many scores below the statewide mean 
in Mr. Smith’s class.” 
• 
Score: “The modes in Mr. Smith’s classes were on the high and low ends of the range of scores, 
compared with the statewide mode.” 
• 
Score: “Very few students in Mr. Smith’s class scored at the statewide mean.” 
• 
Do NOT score “bimodal distribution” without mention of the two modes being above and below  
the mean.   
• 
Do NOT score “half the scores are above and half the scores are below the mean” or “all of the scores are 
above and below the mean” 
© 2018 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Scoring Worksheet 
The following provides a scoring worksheet and conversion table 
used for calculating a composite score of the exam. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2018 AP Psychology Scoring Worksheet 
Section I: Multiple Choice 
Number Correct (
out of one hundr
ed) times one point zero z
e
ro zero zero 
equals Weighted Section I Score (Do not round)
Section II: Free Response 
Question 1  Bl
ank (out of sev
en) times t
hree point five seven one four equals Blank (do not round)
Question 2  
Blank (out of se
ven) times 
three point five seven one four equals Blank (do not round)
Sum equa
ls Weighte
d Section I
I Scor
e (Do not round)
Composite Score 
Weigh
ted S
ection I 
Score plu
s Weighted Section
 II Score equals
 Composite Score 
(Round to nearest wh
ole number)
AP Score Conversion Chart 
Psychology 
Composite 
Score Range 
AP Score 
107-150
88-106
76-87
63-75
0-62
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question Descriptors and Performance Data 
The following contains tables showing the content assessed, 
the correct answer, and how AP students performed on each question. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2018 AP Psychology 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Multiple-Choice Questions 
Question 
Topic 
Key 
% Correct 
1 
Methods 
A 
69 
2 
Social Psychology 
C 
87 
3 
Motivation and Emotion 
A 
43 
4 
Treatment of Psychological Disorders 
A 
77 
5 
Methods 
D 
79 
6 
History and Approaches 
A 
76 
7 
Abnormal Psychology 
C 
84 
8 
Learning 
B 
65 
9 
Social Psychology 
A 
79 
10 
Sensation and Perception 
C 
52 
11 
Cognition 
B 
80 
12 
Developmental Psychology 
B 
88 
13 
Methods 
A 
50 
14 
Cognition 
C 
89 
15 
Personality 
D 
70 
16 
Cognition 
D 
91 
17 
Methods 
B 
81 
18 
Methods 
C 
78 
19 
Cognition 
C 
84 
20 
States of Consciousness 
B 
23 
21 
Treatment of Psychological Disorders 
C 
85 
22 
Abnormal Psychology 
D 
95 
23 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
D 
86 
24 
Testing and Individual Differences 
D 
37 
25 
Abnormal Psychology 
E 
56 
26 
Motivation and Emotion 
B 
67 
27 
Developmental Psychology 
C 
62 
28 
Methods 
A 
55 
29 
Abnormal Psychology 
C 
74 
30 
Learning 
C 
55 
31 
Treatment of Psychological Disorders 
E 
33 
32 
Personality 
D 
53 
33 
Testing and Individual Differences 
C 
35 
34 
Learning 
B 
61 
35 
Sensation and Perception 
A 
73 
36 
Personality 
B 
46 
37 
Testing and Individual Differences 
D 
46 
38 
Testing and Individual Differences 
B 
55 
39 
Learning 
B 
70 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2018 AP Psychology 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Question 
Topic 
Key 
% Correct 
40 
Personality 
B 
40 
41 
Sensation and Perception 
B 
33 
42 
Sensation and Perception 
C 
34 
43 
Social Psychology 
A 
75 
44 
Treatment of Psychological Disorders 
A 
63 
45 
History and Approaches 
E 
75 
46 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
E 
83 
47 
Abnormal Psychology 
C 
94 
48 
Learning 
C 
65 
49 
Social Psychology 
C 
87 
50 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
A 
69 
51 
Testing and Individual Differences 
A 
72 
52 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
D 
76 
53 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
E 
51 
54 
Methods 
B 
59 
55 
Methods 
B 
58 
56 
Methods 
C 
76 
57 
Abnormal Psychology 
C 
79 
58 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
B 
38 
59 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
C 
50 
60 
Motivation and Emotion 
D 
87 
61 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
A 
74 
62 
Treatment of Psychological Disorders 
C 
79 
63 
History and Approaches 
D 
54 
64 
Developmental Psychology 
C 
80 
65 
Social Psychology 
D 
79 
66 
Learning 
A 
80 
67 
Abnormal Psychology 
D 
38 
68 
Learning 
C 
79 
69 
Social Psychology 
E 
90 
70 
Personality 
C 
68 
71 
Developmental Psychology 
C 
83 
72 
Cognition 
A 
87 
73 
Sensation and Perception 
E 
40 
74 
Cognition 
A 
42 
75 
Sensation and Perception 
E 
54 
76 
Motivation and Emotion 
E 
49 
77 
States of Consciousness 
A 
83 
78 
Developmental Psychology 
A 
79 
79 
Social Psychology 
E 
83 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2018 AP Psychology 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Question 
Topic 
Key 
% Correct 
80 
Cognition 
A 
84 
81 
Social Psychology 
D 
40 
82 
Learning 
B 
62 
83 
Motivation and Emotion 
B 
49 
84 
Developmental Psychology 
D 
51 
85 
Developmental Psychology 
D 
86 
86 
Motivation and Emotion 
D 
31 
87 
Cognition 
D 
68 
88 
Developmental Psychology 
B 
78 
89 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
C 
76 
90 
Biological Bases of Behavior 
D 
90 
91 
Social Psychology 
B 
68 
92 
Abnormal Psychology 
A 
93 
93 
Social Psychology 
C 
78 
94 
Developmental Psychology 
B 
93 
95 
Cognition 
C 
81 
96 
Sensation and Perception 
A 
37 
97 
Cognition 
D 
69 
98 
Methods 
C 
91 
99 
Testing and Individual Differences 
B 
69 
100 
Treatment of Psychological Disorders 
C 
58 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology 
The College Board 
The College Board is a mission-driven not-for-profit organization that connects students to college 
success and opportunity. Founded in 1900, the College Board was created to expand access to 
higher education. Today, the membership association is made up of over 6,000 of the world’s leading 
educational institutions and is dedicated to promoting excellence and equity in education. Each year, 
the College Board helps more than seven million students prepare for a successful transition to college  
through programs and services in college readiness and college success — including the SAT® and  
the Advanced Placement Program®. The organization also serves the education community through  
research and advocacy on behalf of students, educators, and schools. The College Board is committed  
to the principles of excellence and equity, and that commitment is embodied in all of its programs, services, 
activities, and concerns. 
