© 2020 College Board. Visit College Board on the Web: www.collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org
Please note: Some of the questions in this former practice exam may 
no longer perfectly align with the AP exam. Even though these 
questions do not fully represent the 2020 exam, teachers indicate 
that imperfectly aligned questions still provide instructional value. 
Teachers can consult the Question Bank to determine the degree to 
which these questions align to the 2020 Exam.
This exam may not be posted on school or personal websites, nor 
electronically redistributed for any reason. This exam is provided by 
the College Board for AP Exam preparation. Teachers are permitted to 
download the materials and make copies to use with their students in a 
classroom setting only. To maintain the security of this exam, teachers 
should collect all materials after their administration and keep them in a 
secure location. 
Further distribution of these materials outside of the secure College 
Board site disadvantages teachers who rely on uncirculated 
questions for classroom testing. Any additional distribution is in 
violation of the College Board’s copyright policies and may result in the 
termination of Practice Exam access for your school as well as the 
removal of access to other online services such as the AP Teacher 
Community and Online Score Reports. 
2020


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Psychology
Practice Exam
From the 2019 Administration
This exam may not be posted on 
school or personal websites, nor 
electronically redistributed for 
any reason. This Released Exam is 
provided by the College Board for 
AP Exam preparation. Teachers are 
permitted to download the materials 
and make copies to use with their 
students in a classroom setting only. 
To maintain the security of this exam, 
teachers should collect all materials 
after their administration and keep 
them in a secure location. 
Further distribution of these 
materials outside of the secure 
College Board site disadvantages 
teachers who rely on uncirculated 
questions for classroom testing. 
Any additional distribution is in 
violation of the College Board’s 
copyright policies and may result 
in the termination of Practice Exam 
access for your school as well as the 
removal of access to other online 
services such as the AP Teacher 
Community and Online Score Reports. 
© 2019 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are 
registered trademarks of the College Board. Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Contents 
Exam Instructions 
Student Answer Sheet for the Multiple-Choice Section  
Section I: Multiple-Choice Questions 
Section II: Free-Response Questions 
Multiple-Choice Answer Key 
Course Framework Alignment and Rationales 
Free-Response Scoring Guidelines 
Scoring Worksheet 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data 
Note: This publication shows the page numbers that appeared in  
the 2018−19 AP Exam Instructions book and in the actual exam.  
This publication was not repaginated to begin with page 1. 
© 2019 The College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement Program, AP, SAT and the acorn logo are 
registered trademarks of the College Board. All other products and services may be trademarks of their 
respective owners. Permission to use copyrighted College Board materials may be requested online at: 
www.collegeboard.org/request-form. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam  
243
AP Psychology Exam
Regularly Scheduled Exam Date: Thursday afternoon, May 9, 2019
Late-Testing Exam Date: Wednesday morning, May 22, 2019
Section I
Total Time: 1 hour and 10 minutes
Number of Questions: 100 
(The number of questions may vary slightly depending on the form of the exam.) 
Percent of Total Score: 66.6%
Writing Instrument: Pencil required
Section II
Total Time: 50 minutes
Number of Questions: 2 essays
Percent of Total Score: 33.3%
Writing Instrument: Pen with black or dark blue ink
Before Distributing Exams: Check that the title on all exam covers is Psychology. If there are any exam booklets 
with a different title, contact the AP coordinator immediately.
 
What Proctors Need to Bring to This Exam
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Exam packets
 Answer sheets
 AP Student Packs
 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual 
 This book—2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
 AP Exam Seating Chart template
 School Code and Homeschool/Self-Study Codes


 Pencil sharpener
Container for students’ electronic devices (if needed)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Extra No. 2 pencils with erasers
 Extra pens with black or dark blue ink
 Lined paper
 Stapler
 Watch
 Signs for the door to the testing room
 
 
– “Exam in Progress”
– “Phones of any kind are prohibited during the 
test administration, including breaks” 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam 
244
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
SECTION I: Multiple Choice
 ›
Do not begin the exam instructions below until you have completed the 
appropriate General Instructions for your group.
Make sure you begin the exam at the designated time. Remember, you must complete a 
seating chart for this exam. See pages 295–296 for a seating chart template and instructions. 
See the 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual for exam seating requirements (pages 56–59).
If you are giving the regularly scheduled exam, say:
It is Thursday afternoon, May 9, and you will be taking the AP Psychology Exam.
If you are giving the alternate exam for late testing, say:
It is Wednesday morning, May 22, and you will be taking the AP Psychology Exam.
Look at your exam packet and confirm that the exam title is “AP Psychology.” 
Raise your hand if your exam packet contains any title other than 
“AP Psychology,” and I will help you.
Once you confirm that all students have the correct exams, say:
In a moment, you will open the exam packet. By opening this packet, you 
agree to all of the AP Program’s policies and procedures outlined in the 
2018-19 Bulletin for AP Students and Parents.
You may now remove the shrinkwrap from the outside only of your exam 
packet. Do not open the Section I booklet; do not remove the shrinkwrap from 
the Section II materials. Put the white seals and the shrinkwrapped Section II 
booklet aside. . . .
Carefully remove the AP Exam label found near the top left of your exam 
booklet cover. Place it on page 1 of your answer sheet on the light blue box near 
the top right corner that reads “AP Exam Label.”
If students accidentally place the exam label in the space for the number label or vice 
versa, advise them to leave the labels in place. They should not try to remove the label; 
their exam can still be processed correctly. 
Listen carefully to all my instructions. I will give you time to complete each 
step. Please look up after completing each step. Raise your hand if you have 
any questions.
Give students enough time to complete each step. Don’t move on until all students are ready.
Read the statements on the front cover of the Section I booklet. . . .
Sign your name and write today’s date. . . .
Now print your full legal name where indicated. . . .
Turn to the back cover of your exam booklet and read it completely. . . .
Give students a few minutes to read the entire cover.
Are there any questions? . . .
You will now take the multiple-choice portion of the exam. You should have in 
front of you the multiple-choice booklet and your answer sheet. You may never 
discuss the multiple-choice exam content at any time in any form with anyone, 
including your teacher and other students. If you disclose the multiple-choice 
exam content through any means, your AP Exam score will be canceled. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam  
AP Psychology Exam  
245
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
Open your answer sheet to page 2. You must complete the answer sheet using a 
No. 2 pencil only. Mark all of your responses beginning on page 2 of your answer 
sheet, one response per question. Completely fill in the circles. If you need to 
erase, do so carefully and completely. No credit will be given for anything written 
in the exam booklet. Scratch paper is not allowed, but you may use the margins or 
any blank space in the exam booklet for scratch work. Are there any questions? . . .
You have 1 hour and 10 minutes for this section. Open your Section I booklet 
and begin. 
Note Start Time 
 . Note Stop Time 
 .
Check that students are marking their answers in pencil on their answer sheets and that 
they have not opened their shrinkwrapped Section II booklets. 
After 1 hour, say: 
There are 10 minutes remaining.
After 10 minutes, say:
Stop working. Close your booklet and put your answer sheet on your desk, 
faceup. Make sure you have your AP number label and an AP Exam label on 
page 1 of your answer sheet. Sit quietly while I collect your answer sheets.
Collect an answer sheet from each student. Check that each answer sheet has an AP 
number label and an AP Exam label. 
After all answer sheets have been collected, say:
Now you must seal your exam booklet using the white seals you set aside 
earlier. Remove the white seals from the backing and press one on each area of 
your exam booklet cover marked “PLACE SEAL HERE.” Fold each seal over the 
back cover. When you have finished, place the booklet on your desk, faceup. 
I will now collect your Section I booklet. . . . 
Collect a Section I booklet from each student. Check that each student has signed the front 
cover of the sealed Section I booklet.
There is a 10-minute break between Sections I and II. 
When all Section I materials have been collected and accounted for and you are 
ready for the break, say:
Please listen carefully to these instructions before we take a 10-minute break. 
All items you placed under your chair at the beginning of this exam, including 
your Student Pack, must stay there, and you are not permitted to open or access 
them in any way. Leave your shrinkwrapped Section II packet on your desk 
during the break. You are not allowed to consult teachers, other students, notes, 
textbooks, or any other resources during the break. You may not make phone 
calls, send text messages, check email, use a social networking site, or access 
any electronic or communication device. You may not leave the designated break 
area. Remember, you may never discuss the multiple-choice exam content with 
anyone, and if you disclose the content through any means, your AP Exam score 
will be canceled. Are there any questions? . . .
You may begin your break. Testing will resume at 
 .


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam 
246
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
SECTION II: Free Response
After the break, say:
May I have everyone’s attention? Place your Student Pack on your desk. . . .
You may now remove the shrinkwrap from the Section II packet, but do not open 
the exam booklet until you are told to do so. . . . 
Read the bulleted statements on the front cover of the exam booklet. Look up 
when you have finished. . . .
Now take an AP number label from your Student Pack and place it on the shaded 
box. If you don’t have any AP number labels, write your AP number in the box. Look 
up when you have finished. . . .
Read the last statement. . . . 
Using your pen, print the first, middle, and last initials of your legal name in the 
boxes and print today’s date where indicated. This constitutes your signature and 
your agreement to the statements on the front cover. . . .
Now turn to the back cover. Using your pen, complete Items 1 through 3 under 
“Important Identification Information.”. . .
Read Item 4. . . . 
Are there any questions? . . .
If this is your last AP Exam, you may keep your Student Pack. Place it under your 
chair for now. Otherwise if you are taking any other AP Exams this year, leave 
your Student Pack on your desk and I will collect it now. . . .
Read the information on the back cover of the exam booklet. Do not open the 
booklet until you are told to do so. Look up when you have finished. . . .
Collect the Student Packs from students who are taking any other AP Exams this year. 
Then say: 
Are there any questions? . . . 
You have 50 minutes to complete Section II. It is suggested that you divide your 
time equally between the two questions. You may use page 3 and the unlined 
pages of the booklet to organize your answers and for scratch work, but you 
must write your answers on the lined pages provided for each question. Begin 
each answer on the first lined page facing the question. 
The questions are repeated for your convenience. You are responsible for pacing 
yourself, and you may proceed freely from one question to the next. You must 
write your answers in the exam booklet using your pen. If you need more paper to 
complete your responses, raise your hand. At the top of each extra sheet of paper 
you use, write only:
 
 
 
 your AP number,
 the exam title, and
 the question number you are working on. 
Do not write your name. Are there any questions? . . . 
You may begin. 
Note Start Time 
 . Note Stop Time 
 .


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam  
AP Psychology Exam  
247
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
Check that students are using pens to write their answers in their exam booklets. 
After 40 minutes, say:
There are 10 minutes remaining.
After 10 minutes, say: 
Stop working and close your exam booklet. Place it on your desk, faceup. . . .
If any students used extra paper for a question in the free-response section, have those 
students staple the extra sheet(s) to the first page corresponding to that question in their 
free-response exam booklets. Complete an Incident Report after the exam and return 
these free-response booklets with the extra sheets attached in the Incident Report return 
envelope (see page 68 of the 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual for complete details).
Then say:
Remain in your seat, without talking, while the exam materials are collected. . . .
Collect a Section II booklet from each student. Check for the following:
 Exam booklet front cover: The student placed an AP number label on the shaded box 
and printed their initials and today’s date.
 

 Exam booklet back cover: The student completed the “Important Identification 
Information” area.
When all exam materials have been collected and accounted for, return to students any 
electronic devices you may have collected before the start of the exam. 
If you are giving the regularly scheduled exam, say:
You may not discuss or share the free-response exam content with anyone unless 
it is released on the College Board website in about two days. Your AP Exam 
score results will be available online in July.
If you are giving the alternate exam for late testing, say:
None of the content in this exam may ever be discussed or shared in any way at 
any time. Your AP Exam score results will be available online in July.
If any students completed the AP number card at the beginning of this exam, say:
Please remember to take your AP number card with you. You will need the 
information on this card to view your scores and order AP score reporting 
services online.
Then say:
You are now dismissed.
After-Exam Tasks
Be sure to give the completed seating chart to the AP coordinator. Schools must retain 
seating charts for at least six months (unless the state or district requires that they be 
retained for a longer period of time). Schools should not return any seating charts in their 
exam shipments unless they are required as part of an Incident Report.
NOTE: If you administered exams to students with accommodations, review the 2018-19 AP 
Coordinator’s Manual and the 2018-19 AP SSD Guidelines for information about completing 
the Nonstandard Administration Report (NAR) form, and returning these exams.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP Psychology Exam 
248
2018-19 AP Exam Instructions
The exam proctor should complete the following tasks if asked to do so by the 
AP coordinator. Otherwise, the AP coordinator must complete these tasks:
 Complete an Incident Report for any students who used extra paper for the free-response 
section. (Incident Report forms are provided in the coordinator packets sent with 
the exam shipments.) These forms must be completed with a No. 2 pencil. It is 
best to complete a single Incident Report for multiple students per exam subject, per 
administration (regular or late testing), as long as all required information is provided. 
Include all exam booklets with extra sheets of paper in an Incident Report return 
envelope (see page 68 of the 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual for complete details).
 Return all exam materials to secure storage until they are shipped back to the 
AP Program. (See page 27 of the 2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual for more information 
about secure storage.) Before storing materials, check the “School Use Only” section on 
page 1 of the answer sheet and: 


 
 
 Fill in the appropriate section number circle in order to access a separate 
AP Instructional Planning Report (for regularly scheduled exams only) or subject 
score roster at the class section or teacher level. See “Post-Exam Activities” in the 
2018-19 AP Coordinator’s Manual.
 Check your list of students who are eligible for fee reductions and fill in the 
appropriate circle on their registration answer sheets.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Name:____________________________________ 
Answer Sheet for AP Psychology 
Practice Exam, Section I 
No. 
Answer 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
No. 
Answer 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
No. 
Answer 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
78 
79 
80 
81 
82 
83 
84 
85 
86 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
97 
98 
99 
100 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Psychology Exam 
2019 
SECTION I: Multiple Choice 
DO NOT OPEN THIS BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
At a Glance 
Total Time 
1 hour and 10 minutes 
Number of Questions 
100 
Percent of Total Score 
66.6% 
Writing Instrument 
Pencil required 
Instructions 
Section I of this exam contains 100 multiple-choice questions. Fill in only the circles for 
numbers 1 through 100 on your answer sheet. 
Indicate all of your answers to the multiple-choice questions on the answer sheet. No 
credit will be given for anything written in this exam booklet, but you may use the booklet 
for notes or scratch work. After you have decided which of the suggested answers is best, 
completely fill in the corresponding circle on the answer sheet. Give only one answer to 
each question. If you change an answer, be sure that the previous mark is erased 
completely. Here is a sample question and answer. sample question and sample answer
Use your time effectively, working as quickly as you can without losing accuracy. Do not 
spend too much time on any one question. Go on to other questions and come back to 
the ones you have not answered if you have time. It is not expected that everyone will 
know the answers to all of the multiple-choice questions. 
Your total score on the multiple-choice section is based only on the number of questions 
answered correctly. Points are not deducted for incorrect answers or unanswered 
questions. 
Form I 
Form Code 4PBP4-S 
85 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-3- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
PSYCHOLOGY 
SECTION I 
Time—1 hour and 10 minutes 
100 Questions 
Directions:  Each of the questions or incomplete statements below is followed by five suggested answers or 
completions. Select the one that is best in each case and then fill in the corresponding circle on the answer sheet. 
 1. A child reading a book points to a picture on the 
page and calls to his mother in another room and 
says, “Mommy, who’s in this picture?” He 
expects that she will know what he is pointing at, 
even though she cannot see it. Which of the 
following concepts is illustrated in this example? 
(A) Animism 
(B) Assimilation 
(C) Conservation 
(D) Egocentrism 
(E) Object permanence 
 2. Which of the following types of intelligence is 
most clearly demonstrated by an individual’s 
knowledge of facts? 
(A) Fluid 
(B) Practical 
(C) Analytical 
(D) Kinesthetic 
(E) Crystallized 
 3. The mutual influence of external stimuli and 
cognitive processes in regulating behavior is 
known as 
(A) congruence between self-systems 
(B) self-efficacy 
(C) reciprocal determinism 
(D) locus of control 
(E) group polarization 
 4. For most of his life, Mike has been overweight. 
Not long after going on a diet and losing over  
30 pounds, Mike gained back nearly all the 
weight. Which of the following concepts best 
explains Mike’s experience? 
(A) Drive-reduction theory 
(B) Anorexia nervosa 
(C) Basal metabolic rate 
(D) Set-point theory 
(E) Instincts 
 5. A few people witness an assault. Before the police 
arrive, one witness confidently tells the others that 
the assailant was wearing a green shirt, though in 
fact the shirt was blue. Later, when the police 
interview each witness individually, almost all of 
them state that they remember a green shirt. The 
memory error is referred to as 
(A) proactive interference 
(B) the serial position effect 
(C) the misinformation effect 
(D) the McGurk effect 
(E) the Stroop effect 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-4- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
6. James makes a lot of money by lying to people  
in order to get them to invest in his company. 
James believes he is important and immune to 
prosecution, and he does not care about the people 
he takes money from. These characteristics are 
most associated with which of the following 
personality disorders? 
 
(A) Dependent 
(B) Narcissistic 
(C) Histrionic 
(D) Schizotypal 
(E) Obsessive-compulsive 
 7. Adrian loves to do dangerous activities like 
surfing and skydiving because of the thrill he gets. 
Which of the following is a theory of motivation 
that best explains Adrian’s desire to do dangerous 
activities? 
(A) Drive-reduction 
(B) Incentive 
(C) Arousal  
(D) Evolutionary  
(E) Expectancy 
 8. Jerome does not like his English teacher, and he 
believes that the teacher thinks that he is not a 
good student. As a result, Jerome slouches at his 
desk and gazes out the window instead of paying 
attention in class. Jerome’s behavior is most 
representative of 
(A) deindividuation 
(B) the just-world phenomenon 
(C) a self-fulfilling prophecy 
(D) cognitive dissonance 
(E) the that’s-not-all phenomenon 
 9. Rocio is continually learning new skills and 
gaining insights into herself. Although she is  
not experiencing any distress, she chooses to see  
a therapist. This primary emphasis on growth is  
most reflective of which of the following 
perspectives? 
(A) Psychodynamic 
(B) Behavioral 
(C) Evolutionary 
(D) Biopsychosocial 
(E) Humanistic 
10. People who play slot machines in gambling 
casinos usually exhibit steady, rapid rates of 
responding. This is because most games of  
chance use what schedule of reinforcement? 
(A) Fixed-interval 
(B) Fixed-ratio 
(C) Variable-interval 
(D) Variable-ratio 
(E) Continuous 
11. After a lengthy interview, Dr. Richard decides 
that the preferred treatment for Maurice is 
systematic desensitization. Which of the 
following is Dr. Richard’s most likely  
diagnosis of Maurice? 
(A) Conversion disorder 
(B) Obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(C) Specific phobia 
(D) Schizophrenia 
(E) Generalized anxiety disorder 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-5- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
12. When Lois looks at her wedding pictures, she has 
vivid memories of the early years of her marriage. 
The pictures serve as 
(A) encoding devices 
(B) iconic memories 
(C) implicit memories 
(D) retrieval cues 
(E) semantic cues 
13. Danny pushes Judy so he can steal her dessert. 
Which of the following best explains Danny’s 
aggressive behavior? 
(A) The frustration-aggression hypothesis 
(B) Excitation of transfer 
(C) Hostile aggression 
(D) Instrumental aggression 
(E) Social learning theory 
14. A person with a severe head injury subsequently 
acts irresponsibly, does not seem to be able to 
plan effectively, and is easy to anger. Which of 
the following brain areas is most likely injured? 
(A) Cerebellum 
(B) Hypothalamus 
(C) Parietal lobe 
(D) Frontal lobe 
(E) Corpus callosum 
15. When Jaci works on a project alone, she puts in a 
lot of effort and meets deadlines. However, when 
she works on a project in a group, she rarely 
attends scheduled meetings and always misses the 
deadline when submitting the part of the project 
she is responsible for completing. Jaci’s behavior 
is best explained by 
(A) ethnocentrism 
(B) framing 
(C) groupthink 
(D) group polarization 
(E) social loafing 
16. Makayla and Noah are listening to a song  
that ends with all the instruments playing the 
same note. Makayla can distinguish the various 
instruments playing the note, while Noah cannot. 
Which of the following best explains their 
perceptual differences? 
(A) Makayla has synesthesia while Noah  
does not. 
(B) Makayla has a lower absolute threshold for 
sound than Noah. 
(C) Makayla has a higher difference threshold for 
sound than Noah. 
(D) Makayla is better at discriminating amplitude 
than Noah. 
(E) Makayla is better at discriminating timbre 
than Noah. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-6- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
17. A person uses the availability heuristic to 
(A) maintain a positive self-concept during  
times of stress 
(B) make a decision quickly by using the  
first information that comes to mind 
(C) avoid making the fundamental 
attribution error 
(D) prevent making a base-rate fallacy error 
(E) avoid a self-fulfilling prophecy 
18. A major university develops an assessment that  
is meant to provide data on whether potential 
students will be successful at the university level. 
If there is a relationship between the results of  
the assessment and student success, that will best 
indicate that the assessment has 
(A) good operational definitions 
(B) external validity 
(C) predictive validity 
(D) content validity 
(E) standardization 
Questions 19-20 refer to the following information. 
Annie experiences disorganized thinking and 
communicates with people who do not exist. 
19. Which of the following is the most likely 
classification of Annie’s problems? 
(A) Autism spectrum disorder 
(B) Major depressive disorder 
(C) Borderline personality disorder 
(D) Conversion disorder 
(E) Schizophrenia 
20. Which of the following treatments is most likely 
to be used to treat Annie’s problems? 
(A) Person-centered therapy 
(B) Cognitive behavioral therapy 
(C) Psychoanalysis 
(D) Antipsychotic medication 
(E) Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) 
21. According to Diana Baumrind, which of the 
following is a parenting style that, among children 
raised in the United States, is most closely 
associated with the development of self-reliance 
and confidence? 
(A) Authoritarian 
(B) Authoritative 
(C) Permissive 
(D) Neglectful 
(E) Secure 
22. Alicia has a condition in which tiny crystals break 
loose and randomly touch and bend the hair cells 
in her semicircular canals. Which of the following 
is the most likely effect of this condition? 
(A) Loss of feeling in her limbs 
(B) Confusion about right and left directions 
(C) Dizziness and loss of balance 
(D) Inability to recognize her body parts 
(E) Inability to determine the position of her 
joints 
23. Sara had an argument with her coworker, Adam.  
That night, Sara had a dream that she was 
shopping at a mall and Adam was in every store 
in which she shopped. A psychoanalyst would say 
that Adam’s being at the mall in her dream was an 
example of which of the following?  
(A) The manifest content 
(B) The latent content 
(C) Memory consolidation 
(D) Repression 
(E) A hypnagogic hallucination 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-7- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
24. Which of the following is a response acquired 
through classical conditioning? 
(A) A woman’s stomach growls when she looks 
at the clock and sees it is almost lunchtime.  
(B) A dog salivates at the taste of food.  
(C) A man pulls his hand away from a hot burner 
on the stove. 
(D) A child cleans his room more often when he 
is rewarded for doing so. 
(E) A driver stops speeding after receiving  
a ticket.  
25. Dr. Zoey believes that major depressive disorder 
is caused by neurotransmitter abnormalities and  
is most effectively treated with medication. 
Which of the following is a treatment approach 
that Dr. Zoey most likely supports? 
(A) Humanistic 
(B) Biomedical 
(C) Psychodynamic  
(D) Behavioral 
(E) Cognitive  
26. Which of the following statements correctly 
matches a physiological change with its 
corresponding stage of development? 
(A) Closing of the neural tube in infancy 
(B) Development of secondary sex characteristics 
during prenatal development 
(C) Decrease in neural networking during 
childhood 
(D) Decrease in sex hormones in late adulthood 
(E) Increase in hormones in middle adulthood 
27. Doug is part of a large creative-design team at an 
advertising firm. The team comes up with many 
slogans for products. Some are successful; some 
are failures. Whenever the team comes up with a 
winner, Doug takes full responsibility and talks 
about how much of a role he played in the team’s 
success. When slogans are not effective, he denies 
having a big role in the project. Doug is most 
clearly demonstrating 
(A) low self-esteem 
(B) a self-serving bias 
(C) an actor-observer bias 
(D) a misattribution error 
(E) sublimation 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-8- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
T
he figure presents a bar graph tit
l
ed “Estimate of Likel
ihood of Drawing an Ace Across Trails.” The vertical axis is labeled “Mary Alice’s Estimate of the Probability of Drawing an Ace,” and the numbers 0 through 70, in increments of 10, are indicated. The horizontal axis is labeled “Trial Numbers,” and the numbers 1 through 13, in increments of 1, are indicated. There is one bar for each number. The data presented by the bars are as follows. Note that all values are approximate. Trial 1, 5. Trial 2, 6. Trial 3, 11. Trial 4, 11. Trial 5, 11. Trial 6, 11. Trial 7, 15. Trial 8, 20. Trial 9, 25. Trial 10, 30. Trial 11, 40. Trial 12, 50. Trial 13, 65.
28. There are four aces in a 52-card deck of playing cards.  
Prior to drawing a card from the deck, Mary Alice estimates 
the chance that she will draw an ace and win a prize. Over  
a series of trials, she did not draw an ace, so she replaced  
the card she had drawn, shuffled the deck, and drew a card. 
The graph above shows her estimates of how likely it was  
that she would draw an ace on the next trial. The pattern of 
Mary Alice’s thinking reflects what psychological 
phenomenon? 
(A) Mental set 
(B) Flynn effect 
(C) Availability heuristic 
(D) Gambler’s fallacy 
(E) Reasoning by analogy 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-9- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
29. Dr. Roberts conducts a study in which one group 
of participants counts the number of syllables in 
each member of a list of twenty words, and the 
second group creates stories from the same set of 
words. When later asked to write down as many 
of the previously seen words as possible, the 
second group of participants recalls more words 
than the first group. This study shows the 
importance of 
(A) the pragmatics of language 
(B) semantic encoding 
(C) maintenance rehearsal 
(D) convergent thinking 
(E) shallow processing 
30. The Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) is an 
example of which of the following types of tests? 
(A) Aptitude 
(B) Achievement 
(C) Intelligence 
(D) Projective 
(E) Neuropsychological 
The figure presents a bar graph. The vertical axis is labeled “Percentage of People with Disorder,” and no values are given. The horizontal axis is labeled “Disorder,” and four categories are indicated. There are two bars for each category on the horizontal axis. A key indicates that one bar represents “Annual income below $20,000,” and that the other bar represents “Annual income above $70 000.” The data presented by the bars are as follows. Category 1. Major depression. Annual income below $20,000, 27%. Annual income above $70,000, 19%. Category 2. Social anxiety. Annual income below $20,000, 10%. Annual income above $70,000, 6%. Category 3. Posttraumatic stress disorder. Annual income below $20,000, 9%. Annual income above $70,000, 5%. Category 4. Schizophrenia. Annual income below $20,000, 2%. Annual income above $70,000, 0.3%.
31. The results depicted in the graph above supports which of the following perspectives on the origins of abnormal 
behavior? 
(A) Biomedical 
(B) Sociocultural 
(C) Humanistic 
(D) Psychoanalytic 
(E) Behavioral 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-10- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
32. A test author most interested in ensuring that 
individuals receive similar scores on a personality 
test every time they take it is attempting  
to increase which of the following? 
(A) Validity 
(B) Reliability 
(C) Experimenter-expectancy effects 
(D) Standardization 
(E) Statistical significance 
33. Which of the following is the best evidence that 
environment plays a role in intelligence? 
(A) Identical twins reared together are more 
similar than identical twins reared apart. 
(B) Identical twins reared apart are more similar 
than fraternal twins reared together. 
(C) Fraternal twins reared together are more 
similar than unrelated individuals reared 
together. 
(D) Unrelated individuals reared together are less 
similar than siblings reared together. 
(E) Fraternal twins are less similar than identical 
twins. 
34. Which of the following theorists suggested that 
intelligence can be classified into general and 
specific intelligence factors? 
(A) Charles Spearman 
(B) Lewis Terman 
(C) Louis Thurstone 
(D) Howard Gardner 
(E) Robert Sternberg 
35. Which of the following statements is true of 
Hermann Ebbinghaus and his research? 
(A) He used imaging techniques to see if the 
components of short-term memory were 
reflected in different regions of the brain. 
(B) He studied college students to see if it was 
easier for them to memorize items presented 
randomly or in categories. 
(C) He memorized and later recalled hundreds of 
nonsense syllables to document memory 
decay. 
(D) He studied monkeys to see how long it would 
take for them to habituate to a stimulus. 
(E) He studied children over a ten-year period to 
determine how long information lasts in 
sensory memory. 
36. Which of the following neurotransmitters has 
been most associated with major depressive 
disorder? 
(A) Acetylcholine  
(B) Dopamine 
(C) Histamine 
(D) Serotonin 
(E) Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
37. Beth received a hemispherectomy to treat a 
seizure disorder when she was two years old. 
However, by the time she was five years old, her 
cognitive abilities were the same as those of a 
neurotypical five year old. Which of the following 
best explains her abilities? 
(A) Reuptake 
(B) Dual processing 
(C) Accommodation 
(D) Myelination 
(E) Neuroplasticity 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-11- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
38. In a recent report, a developmental psychologist 
who studied peer pressure in middle schools 
obtained data from a large, representative  
sample of adolescents across the United States. 
This research most likely involved a 
(A) survey 
(B) case study 
(C) laboratory experiment 
(D) naturalistic observation 
(E) single-subject design 
The figure presents two diagrams. Each diagram consists of a box with dots inside it. The first box is labeled A, and the second box is labeled B. Box A has 10 dots organized in 2 rows of 5 at the center of the box. The dots are placed close to one another. Box B has 10 dots organized in 2 rows of 5. The dots in the first row are close to one another, and the dots in the second row are far from one another.
39. Four-year-old Rebecca states that the two lines in 
set A have the same number of dots but that the 
second line in set B has more dots than the first 
line has. Rebecca’s inability to report that the  
two rows in set B contain the same number of 
dots reflects a lack of  
(A) animism 
(B) theory of mind 
(C) conservation 
(D) accommodation 
(E) object permanence 
40. Zeke is attempting to learn more about his world. 
When he encounters a new object, he picks it up 
and puts it in his mouth. Zeke is most likely in 
which of Jean Piaget’s stages of cognitive 
development? 
(A) Sensorimotor 
(B) Preoperational 
(C) Concrete operational 
(D) Formal operational 
(E) Postconventional 
41. Which of the following best reflects an external 
attribution? 
(A) Dan practices his violin before his lesson. 
(B) Sheila believes that people who are poor are 
responsible for their financial problems. 
(C) George believes that working hard will lead 
to a promotion at work. 
(D) Marcy concludes she did poorly on her exam 
because it was unfair. 
(E) Deirdre reads mystery novels purely for 
enjoyment. 
42. An illusory correlation is best defined as a 
(A) perceived relationship where one does  
not exist 
(B) causal relationship 
(C) correlation of 0 
(D) correlation of negative 1.0
(E) correlation of positive 1.0


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-12- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
43. In Stanley Milgram’s experiments, which of the 
following concepts is a possible explanation for 
participants’ willingness to apply increasingly 
intense shocks to a confederate in the other room? 
(A) Groupthink 
(B) Social facilitation 
(C) Anchoring 
(D) Door-in-the-face 
(E) Foot-in-the-door 
44. Participants were asked to rate the importance  
of achieving honor-roll status. Researchers  
found that students from smaller families rated  
the importance more highly than students from 
larger families. The research team concluded that 
a student’s attitude toward school achievement  
is the result of family size. Which of the following 
is the most important error made by the  
research team? 
(A) Perceiving order in random events 
(B) Generalizing from extreme examples 
(C) Using self-report data 
(D) Failing to randomly assign participants to 
conditions 
(E) Assuming that correlation proves causation 
45. Danielle was laid off from her job six months ago 
and has been unsuccessful at finding a new one. 
The income from her long hours of temp work 
barely covers her bills. She has begun to have 
frequent cold and flu symptoms and has become 
depressed. Danielle is most likely in the stage  
of Hans Selye’s general adaptation syndrome 
known as 
(A) alarm 
(B) reaction 
(C) exhaustion 
(D) resistance 
(E) delay 
46. One day, during a therapy session, the client 
suddenly began acting angrily toward the therapist 
with no provocation. A psychodynamically 
oriented therapist would describe this behavior as 
which of the following? 
(A) Projection 
(B) Transference 
(C) Countertransference 
(D) Sublimation 
(E) Reaction formation 
47. Which of the following theories proposes that 
motivational states are controlled by external 
stimuli? 
(A) Cognitive 
(B) Homeostatic 
(C) Incentive 
(D) Evolutionary 
(E) Psychoanalytic 
48. A man sustains a head injury. After the injury,  
he is able to tie his shoes, but he does not recall 
where he lives. Which aspect of the man’s 
memory is intact and which aspect is 
dysfunctional, respectively? 
(A) Procedural and semantic 
(B) Procedural and sensory 
(C) Semantic and sensory 
(D) Episodic and procedural 
(E) Episodic and semantic 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-13- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
49. Cognitive psychologists are most likely to use 
which method of treatment with their clients? 
(A) Aversion therapy 
(B) Drug therapy 
(C) Free association 
(D) Rational-emotive behavior therapy 
(E) Counterconditioning 
50. Which of the following is the best example of the 
cognitive process Jean Piaget called assimilation? 
(A) When her father cuts her single slice of pizza 
into three pieces, Megan thinks she has 
more than her sister, who has a single slice. 
(B) When her mother leaves the room, Lillian 
continues playing with toys without 
becoming anxious. 
(C) Having learned that his family pet is a dog, 
William sees a neighbor’s cat and says, 
“Dog!” 
(D) David, who previously called all animals 
“doggies,” sees a horse and says, “Horse!”  
(E) After his favorite toy car is accidentally 
kicked under a bed where he cannot see it, 
two-year-old Arturo crawls under the bed to 
retrieve it. 
51. Parkinson’s disease is most closely  
associated with 
(A) decreases in levels of dopamine 
(B) reduced availability of acetylcholine 
(C) destruction of the myelin sheath 
(D) an increase in the number of synapses 
(E) stimulation of action potentials 
52. Which of the following is a parasympathetic 
nervous system response? 
(A) Pupil dilation 
(B) Inhibition of bladder contraction 
(C) Increased digestion 
(D) Increased adrenaline secretion 
(E) Inhibition of salivation 
53. Being able to perform a task so well that the 
performance becomes automatic is most likely a 
result of  
(A) homeostasis 
(B) instinct 
(C) discriminative learning 
(D) self-efficacy 
(E) overlearning 
54. Most intelligence tests are normed such that the 
mean score is 100 and the standard deviation  
is 15. Therefore, the discovery of the Flynn effect 
leads one to conclude that 
(A) IQ tests should be renormed at periodic 
intervals 
(B) the tests may not have been valid when  
they were initially constructed 
(C) members of minority groups may not be 
accurately assessed by IQ tests 
(D) the relatively high reliability coefficients  
for IQ tests may not be accurate 
(E) IQ scores tend not to change over the course 
of a person’s life 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-14- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
55. Lewis Terman’s studies of gifted children 
indicated that 
(A) they often experience psychological problems 
as adults 
(B) they frequently have difficulty interacting 
with peers 
(C) they generally demonstrate  
above-average emotional stability and  
social satisfaction in adulthood 
(D) their intelligence scores continue to increase 
throughout their lives 
(E) they are more likely than average to have 
difficulties in marriage or other personal 
relationships as adults 
56. Ahmet is allergic to dogs. While in the toy store 
he sees a stuffed toy dog and has an allergic 
reaction. Ahmet’s reaction to the toy best 
demonstrates the process of 
(A) spontaneous recovery 
(B) secondary reinforcement 
(C) latent learning 
(D) generalization 
(E) shaping 
57. Jeff lives in the United States, and he recently 
flew to Spain. Even after sleeping for several 
hours on the flight, he still felt lethargic for a 
few days. If Jeff has not caught an illness, which 
of the following is the most likely explanation  
for his physical response? 
(A) His circadian rhythm has been disrupted. 
(B) His stages of sleep are out of order. 
(C) His delta waves have lost significant 
amplitude. 
(D) He has narcolepsy. 
(E) He is experiencing REM rebound. 
58. Dr. Jones is conducting research to determine if 
IQ changes with age. The research design 
includes three groups of participants. Group 1 
consists of 10 year olds, group 2 of 15 year olds, 
and group 3 of 25 year olds. Dr. Jones gives an  
IQ test to all three groups to determine the 
average IQ of each group. The design of the 
research is 
(A) longitudinal 
(B) cross-sequential 
(C) cross-sectional  
(D) experimental 
(E) observational 
59. The self-actualizing tendency is most associated 
with which of the following personality 
perspectives? 
(A) Psychoanalytic 
(B) Social cognitive 
(C) Trait 
(D) Humanistic 
(E) Biological 
60. Which of the following is true of how the human 
eye detects the color red? 
(A) It relies on only cones. 
(B) It relies on only rods. 
(C) It relies on both rods  
and cones. 
(D) It occurs at the level of  
the pupil. 
(E) It occurs at the level of  
the lens. 
61. Belinda exhibits diminished pleasure in her daily 
activities, significant weight loss, insomnia, 
fatigue, and feelings of excessive guilt. Belinda’s 
problems are most consistent with which of the 
following disorders? 
(A) Obsessive-compulsive  
(B) Bipolar 
(C) Schizophrenia 
(D) Major depressive  
(E) Agoraphobia 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-15-
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
Questions 62-64 are based on the following. 
Data Set A 
Data Set B 
3
16 
4
17 
6
18 
12
18 
16
18 
17
19
19
20
62. In data set A, the mean is
(A)
3
(B) 11
(C) 12
(D) 13
(E) 18
63. In data set B, the range is
(A)
1
(B)
1
(C)
4
(D) 12
(E) 18
64. Using the data in sets A and B, which of the
following statements is true?
(A) Both sets of data are bimodal.
(B) Set B has a smaller standard deviation
than set A.
(C) The mean for set B is smaller than the mean
for set A.
(D) Each set of data represents a normal
distribution.
(E) Data set B has a skewed distribution.
65. Clinical researchers are interested in gaining
insight into the causes of abnormal behavior.
One way that they do this is to delve deeply into
the histories of patients with a common diagnosis,
interviewing family, friends, teachers, therapists,
physicians, babysitters, and others who can
provide rich details about the patients’ lives.
Then, researchers try to see if there are any
common themes in the information gathered.
What research method does this strategy
represent?
(A) Experiment
(B) Quantitative analysis
(C) Case study
(D) Quasi-experiment
(E) Naturalistic observation
66. Stimulation of which of the following brain areas
will lead a person to eat?
(A) Ventromedial hypothalamus
(B) Lateral hypothalamus
(C) Thalamus
(D) Somatosensory cortex
(E) Pons
67. Sam has shown some marked changes in the way
he is able to communicate after having a stroke.
He knows what he wants to say, but his speech is
slow and labored. Sam’s grammar is also quite
poor. The part of Sam’s brain that most likely
sustained damage is
(A) the primary somatosensory cortex
(B) the primary motor cortex
(C) the locus coeruleus
(D) Broca’s area
(E) Wernicke’s area


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-16- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
68. Firefighters are often required to walk through 
local buildings and drive trucks around the areas 
they serve as part of their training. The most 
likely purpose of this type of training is to 
develop 
(A) a cognitive map 
(B) a prototype 
(C) an algorithm 
(D) a mental set 
(E) functional fixedness 
69. In classical conditioning, repeated presentations 
of the conditioned stimulus without the 
unconditioned stimulus lead to 
(A) acquisition 
(B) discrimination 
(C) extinction 
(D) backward conditioning 
(E) stimulus generalization 
70. The use of tokens in token economies is an 
example of which of the following types of 
reinforcement? 
(A) Primary 
(B) Secondary 
(C) Negative 
(D) Vicarious 
(E) Aversive 
71. The division of the nervous system that most 
directly allows voluntary muscle movement is the 
(A) midbrain 
(B) forebrain 
(C) sympathetic 
(D) parasympathetic 
(E) somatic 
72. Which of the following approaches to psychology 
focuses on adaptive, creative, and fulfilling 
aspects of human experiences? 
(A) Behavioral 
(B) Positive 
(C) Functional 
(D) Psychodynamic 
(E) Motivational 
73. Connie always worries that something terrible is 
about to happen even when her environment is 
secure. She constantly fidgets and never feels 
relaxed. Connie is most likely to be diagnosed 
with 
(A) specific phobia 
(B) panic disorder 
(C) generalized anxiety disorder 
(D) posttraumatic stress disorder 
(E) somatization disorder 
74. John moves to a new job in a large urban area. For 
the first few days, John is continuously distracted 
by the sounds of traffic and street noise. By the 
end of the first week, John barely notices the 
sounds of the city. Which of the following has 
occurred? 
(A) Sensitization 
(B) Habituation 
(C) Accommodation 
(D) Signal detection 
(E) Conduction deafness 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-17- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
75. A childhood friend asked Jeffrey whether he 
remembered where they went on summer vacation 
when they were eight years old. Jeffrey’s ability 
to recall correctly will rely on which of the 
following? 
(A) Recognition memory 
(B) Free association 
(C) The method of loci 
(D) Implicit memory 
(E) Episodic memory 
76. After each bar press, a laboratory rat receives 
electric stimulation to its brain. The rate of bar 
pressing increases. This is an example of 
(A) positive reinforcement 
(B) negative reinforcement 
(C) secondary reinforcement 
(D) negative punishment 
(E) positive punishment 
77. Alice is shopping with her daughter when she 
hears the word “mom.” Alice answers, only to 
realize that the sales clerk said “ma’am” to a 
customer. This inaccurate perception can be 
attributed to 
(A) perceptual expectancy 
(B) the Müller-Lyer illusion 
(C) Weber’s law 
(D) figure-ground organization 
(E) sound constancy 
78. Melissa reads in a parenting magazine that the 
average age at which children first walk on their 
own is twelve months old, and most children walk 
within the range of nine to seventeen months old. 
The article is discussing the concept of 
(A) standardized testing 
(B) developmental norms 
(C) reliability 
(D) validity 
(E) inferential statistics 
79. One-year-old Sydney cries when his father hands 
him to an unfamiliar babysitter and leaves the 
room. Sydney’s reaction is a result of his 
acquisition of 
(A) conventional reasoning 
(B) self-concept 
(C) gender identity 
(D) object permanence 
(E) conservation 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-18- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
80. Survey research has shown that people with high 
levels of empathy (that is, an ability to imagine 
and feel what others are experiencing) tend to 
indicate lower ratings of enjoyment of violent 
humor than people with lower levels of empathy. 
Based on these results, one can conclude that 
(A) empathy level causes people to like or dislike 
violent humor 
(B) liking violent humor leads to lower levels of 
empathy 
(C) level of empathy correlates negatively with 
enjoyment of violent humor 
(D) level of empathy correlates positively with 
enjoyment of violent humor 
(E) the correlation between humor and empathy 
is unreliable 
81. In the Stanford prison simulation, participants 
were randomly assigned to one of two groups, 
guards or prisoners. After a few days, the 
prisoners staged a failed revolt and were 
consequently punished and humiliated by the 
guards. How did the researchers explain the 
abusive behavior of the guards? 
(A) The guards were obeying the warden’s 
authoritative instructions. 
(B) The guards were influenced by their role and 
the situation. 
(C) The guards had aggressive dispositions. 
(D) The guards were raised and conditioned in 
abusive homes. 
(E) The guards had higher levels of testosterone 
than the prisoners. 
82. Steve was recently arrested for credit card fraud. 
He has a history of breaking the law and getting 
into fights with others. He frequently lies and has 
conned his family out of money on several 
occasions. When confronted about his behavior, 
he does not express any remorse for those he has 
harmed. Which of the following disorders most 
closely matches Steve’s behaviors? 
(A) Borderline personality 
(B) Major depressive 
(C) Antisocial personality 
(D) Schizophrenia 
(E) Generalized anxiety 
The figure presents a curve in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. The horizontal axis is labeled “Arousal.” From left to right, the following three categories are indicated: Low, Medium, and High. The vertical axis is labeled “Performance,” and no values are given. The curve begins on the horizontal axis at Low, and moves upward and to the right until it reaches a maximum high above the horizontal axis at Medium. The curve then moves downward and to the right until it ends on the horizontal axis at High.
83. The above graph is most closely associated with 
(A) homeostasis 
(B) general adaptation syndrome 
(C) misattribution of arousal 
(D) self-serving bias 
(E) Yerkes-Dodson law of arousal 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-19- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
84. Which of the following individuals would be most 
intrinsically motivated to write? 
(A) Greg, who will keep his job as an editor only 
if he publishes a top-selling book every 
month 
(B) Andy, who expects to be paid $20,000 for 
each book that he publishes 
(C) Carlota, who wants to publish enough books 
to buy her dream home 
(D) Savitri, who has several interesting stories 
that she wants to write  
(E) Ray, who was offered $5,000,000 to write a 
sequel to his first book, which was a top 
seller 
85. In a study conducted by Philip Zimbardo, female 
college students were asked to shock other 
students. Half of the female students each wore a 
hood and lab coat to hide their identity. The other 
half each wore their own clothes and a large name 
tag. The results indicated that the hooded students 
delivered twice as many shocks as the other 
students. The results of the study indicate that an 
important contributor to deindividuation is 
(A) having same-sex participants 
(B) groupthink 
(C) social inhibition 
(D) high arousal 
(E) anonymity 
86. Achariya is lost. She quickly scans the crowd  
and decides to ask an elderly woman for 
directions because she believes the woman  
will be kind. Which method of problem solving 
did Achariya most likely use? 
(A) An algorithm 
(B) The availability heuristic 
(C) The representativeness heuristic 
(D) Trial and error 
(E) Divergent thinking 
87. Which of the following phenomena can the 
opponent-process theory of color vision explain 
that the trichromatic theory cannot? 
(A) The presence of the blind spot 
(B) Accommodation of the lens 
(C) The detection of white light 
(D) Light and dark adaptation 
(E) Negative afterimages 
88. A researcher is studying the effect of caffeinated 
drinks on the activity level of ten-year-old 
children. Half of the children in the study drank 
caffeinated soda, and half drank noncaffeinated 
soda. Neither the research team nor the children 
knew which drinks had caffeine and which drinks 
did not. The researchers were using 
(A) the placebo effect 
(B) random selection 
(C) a correlational study 
(D) a single-blind design 
(E) a double-blind design 
89. According to Robert Sternberg’s triarchic theory, 
which of the following types of intelligence 
would be most useful in solving a mathematics 
problem that requires one numerical answer? 
(A) Analytic 
(B) Spatial 
(C) Linguistic 
(D) Intrapersonal 
(E) Kinesthetic 
90. Which of the following falls under the category  
of somatic symptom and related disorders? 
(A) Conversion disorder 
(B) Generalized anxiety disorder 
(C) Dissociative identity disorder 
(D) Kleptomania 
(E) Schizophrenia 
91. Jordan learns a trick to solve one particular type 
of math problem. He then uses the same trick to 
solve other types of math problems, even though 
it does not work and he keeps getting the wrong 
answer. Jordan’s use of the trick is an example of  
(A) spontaneous recovery 
(B) reversibility 
(C) a prototype 
(D) insight 
(E) a mental set 
92. Which therapeutic technique has its origins in the 
humanistic perspective? 
(A) Unconditional positive regard 
(B) Free association 
(C) Systematic desensitization 
(D) Token economy 
(E) Contingency management 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-20- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
93. When Jeremy hears that his neighbor’s house has 
been robbed, he argues that the neighbor deserved 
it because he leaves his expensive electronics out 
where people can see them. Jeremy’s belief is best 
explained by which of the following cognitive 
biases? 
(A) The fundamental attribution error 
(B) The just-world hypothesis 
(C) Out-group homogeneity bias 
(D) The availability heuristic 
(E) Self-handicapping 
94. Ernest and Josephine Hilgard conducted 
experiments in which participants had one hand  
in painfully icy water and the other hand on a 
button to alert the experimenter of feelings of 
pain. After the participants were hypnotized to not 
feel pain, participants did not verbally report 
feeling pain even though they subconsciously 
pressed the button to indicate that they felt pain. 
How did the experimenters explain the 
contradiction in pain perception? 
(A) The participants cannot be hypnotized. 
(B) The participants are experiencing a psychotic 
breakdown. 
(C) The participants are experiencing 
dissociation. 
(D) The participants are repressing the pain in 
their unconscious. 
(E) The participants are dreaming. 
95. Ana is instructed by her doctor to wear a patch 
over one eye while an infection heals. While 
wearing the patch, Ana will lose her ability to use 
which of the following depth perception cues? 
(A) Relative size 
(B) Interposition 
(C) Texture gradient 
(D) Linear perspective 
(E) Retinal disparity 
96. Which theory of motivation is most likely to 
suggest that a younger woman would be attracted 
to an older man because of his greater ability to 
provide for her? 
(A) Evolutionary 
(B) Hierarchy of needs 
(C) Arousal 
(D) Instinct 
(E) Drive-reduction 
 
97. A professor conducts a survey examining the 
relationship between pessimism and mental-health 
problems, and the results of her study are depicted 
in the scatterplot above. Which of the following 
types of relationship between pessimism and 
mental-health problems do her data suggest? 
(A) A positive correlation 
(B) A negative correlation 
(C) Zero correlation 
(D) Cause and effect 
(E) An illusory correlation 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-21- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
98. Raven is an artist who is relaxed, self-disciplined, and emotionally stable. She is very trusting and cooperative. 
She prefers staying at home to going out socially. Which of the following diagrams best represents Raven’s 
personality according to the Big Five trait dimensions? 
N = Neuroticism 
A = Agreeableness 
E = Extraversion 
C = Conscientiousness 
O = Openness 
(A) 
The figure presents a line graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. On the horizontal axis the letters N, A, E, C, and O are indicated from left to right. On the vertical axis, Low is indicated near the origin and High is indicated near the top of the axis. The following 5 points are indicated on the line graph. N is near the bottom of the vertical axis. A is near the top of the vertical axis. E is about one third of the way up the vertical axis. C is two thirds of the way up the vertical axis. O is at the top of the vertical axis.
(B) 
The figure presents a line graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. On the horizontal axis the letters N, A, E, C, and O are indicated from left to right. On the vertical axis, Low is indicated near the origin and High is indicated near the top of the axis. The following 5 points are indicated on the line graph. N is at the bottom of the vertical axis. A is about halfway up the vertical axis. E is at the top of the vertical axis. C is just less than halfway up the vertical axis. O is near the bottom of the vertical axis.
(C) 
The figure presents a line graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. On the horizontal axis the letters N, A, E, C, and O are indicated from left to right. On the vertical axis, Low is indicated near the origin and High is indicated near the top of the axis. The following 5 points are indicated on the line graph. N is near the bottom of the vertical axis. A is slightly farther up the vertical axis than N. E is slightly farther up the vertical axis than A. C is farther up the vertical axis than E. O is at the top of the vertical axis.
(D) 
The figure presents a line graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. On the horizontal axis the letters N, A, E, C, and O are indicated from left to right. On the vertical axis, Low is indicated near the origin and High is indicated near the top of the axis. The following 5 points are indicated on the line graph. N is at the top of the vertical axis. A is about one third of the way up the vertical axis. E is about two thirds of the way of the vertical axis. C is slightly farther down the vertical axis than E. O is slightly farther down the vertical axis than C, and below A.
(E)The figure presents a line graph in the first quadrant of a coordinate plane. On the horizontal axis the letters N, A, E, C, and O are indicated from left to right. On the vertical axis, Low is indicated near the origin and High is indicated near the top of the axis. The following 5 points are indicated on the line graph. N is about halfway up of the vertical axis. A is near the bottom of the vertical axis. E is near the top of the vertical axis. C is just less than halfway up the vertical axis. O is at the top of the vertical axis.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
-22- 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal.
99. Placing group needs above one’s own needs  
is known as 
(A) ethnocentrism 
(B) prejudice 
(C) collectivism 
(D) ego defense 
(E) cognitive dissonance 
100. A medication that primarily enhances the activity 
of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the brain 
would likely be used for the treatment of which 
disorder? 
(A) Bipolar 
(B) Generalized anxiety 
(C) Antisocial personality 
(D) Schizoid personality 
(E) Schizophrenia 
END OF SECTION I 
IF YOU FINISH BEFORE TIME IS CALLED, YOU MAY  
CHECK YOUR WORK ON THIS SECTION. 
DO NOT GO ON TO SECTION II UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE DONE THE FOLLOWING. 
• 
• 
• 
PLACED YOUR AP NUMBER LABEL ON YOUR ANSWER SHEET 
WRITTEN AND GRIDDED YOUR AP NUMBER CORRECTLY ON YOUR  
ANSWER SHEET 
TAKEN THE AP EXAM LABEL FROM THE FRONT OF THIS BOOKLET  
AND PLACED IT ON YOUR ANSWER SHEET  


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP
® Psychology Exam 
2019 
SECTION II: Free Response 
DO NOT OPEN THIS BOOKLET UNTIL YOU ARE TOLD TO DO SO. 
At a Glance 
Total Time 
50 minutes 
Number of Questions 
2 
Percent of Total Score 
33.3% 
Writing Instrument 
Pen with black or dark 
blue ink 
Weight 
The questions are 
weighted equally. 
Instructions 
The questions for Section II are printed in this booklet. You may use page 3 and the 
unlined pages of this booklet to organize your answers and for scratch work, but you must 
write your answers on the lined pages provided for each question. Begin each answer on 
the lined page facing the question. The questions are repeated for your convenience. 
Write clearly and legibly. Do not skip lines. Cross out any errors you make; crossed-out 
work will not be scored. 
Manage your time carefully. Divide your time about equally between the two questions. 
You may proceed freely from one question to the next. You may review your responses if 
you finish before the end of the exam is announced. 
Form I 
Form Code 4PBP4-S 
85 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS.  
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
Question 1 begins on page 4. 
Question 2 begins on page 12. 
-3-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PSYCHOLOGY 
SECTION II 
Time—50 minutes 
Percent of total score—
 
thirty three and one half 
Directions:  You have 50 minutes to answer BOTH of the following questions. It is not enough to answer a question 
by merely listing facts. You should present a cogent argument based on your critical analysis of the questions posed, 
using appropriate psychological terminology. 
 1. Researchers dropped 200 identical wallets on sidewalks near a large university. Each wallet contained the name 
and address of the owner and either a photograph of a baby, a photograph of a puppy, a photograph of a young 
family, a photograph of an older couple, or no photograph. The researchers hypothesized that the type of 
photograph left in the wallet would influence the rate of return. The wallets with a photograph of the baby and 
the wallets with a photograph of the puppy were left early in the morning, the wallets with a photograph of the 
young family were left in the afternoon, and the wallets with either no photograph or a photograph of an older 
couple were left in the evening. Eighty-four of the 200 wallets (42%) were eventually mailed back to the owner, 
as shown below. 
Type of 
Photograph 
Baby
Puppy
Young family
No 
photograph 
Older couple 
Return Rate
80%
65%
47%
10%
5%
A. Identify the following aspects of the study as described above. 
• 
• 
• 
Control condition 
Dependent variable 
Confounding variable 
B. How might cognitive dissonance explain why people returned the wallets? 
C. How might individualistic culture explain why people did not return the wallets? 
D. How might out-group bias explain the low rate of return for the wallets with the older couple’s photograph? 
E. A survey was conducted in which individuals were asked, “Would you return a lost wallet that you found?” 
Use social desirability bias to explain whether the percentage of individuals who answered “yes” to this 
survey question would be higher, the same, or lower than the overall return rate (42%) in the study above. 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS. 
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-4-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-5-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
1. Researchers dropped 200 identical wallets on sidewalks near a large university. Each wallet contained the name 
and address of the owner and either a photograph of a baby, a photograph of a puppy, a photograph of a young 
family, a photograph of an older couple, or no photograph. The researchers hypothesized that the type of 
photograph left in the wallet would influence the rate of return. The wallets with a photograph of the baby and 
the wallets with a photograph of the puppy were left early in the morning, the wallets with a photograph of the 
young family were left in the afternoon, and the wallets with either no photograph or a photograph of an older 
couple were left in the evening. Eighty-four of the 200 wallets (42%) were eventually mailed back to the owner, 
as shown below. 
Type of 
Photograph 
Baby 
Puppy 
Young family 
No 
photograph 
Older couple 
Return Rate 
80% 
65% 
47% 
10% 
5% 
A. Identify the following aspects of the study as described above. 
• 
Control condition 
• 
Dependent variable 
• 
Confounding variable 
B. How might cognitive dissonance explain why people returned the wallets? 
C. How might individualistic culture explain why people did not return the wallets? 
D. How might out-group bias explain the low rate of return for the wallets with the older couple’s photograph? 
E. A survey was conducted in which individuals were asked, “Would you return a lost wallet that you found?” 
Use social desirability bias to explain whether the percentage of individuals who answered “yes” to this 
survey question would be higher, the same, or lower than the overall return rate (42%) in the study above. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-6-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-7-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
1. Researchers dropped 200 identical wallets on sidewalks near a large university. Each wallet contained the name 
and address of the owner and either a photograph of a baby, a photograph of a puppy, a photograph of a young 
family, a photograph of an older couple, or no photograph. The researchers hypothesized that the type of 
photograph left in the wallet would influence the rate of return. The wallets with a photograph of the baby and 
the wallets with a photograph of the puppy were left early in the morning, the wallets with a photograph of the 
young family were left in the afternoon, and the wallets with either no photograph or a photograph of an older 
couple were left in the evening. Eighty-four of the 200 wallets (42%) were eventually mailed back to the owner, 
as shown below. 
Type of 
Photograph 
Baby 
Puppy 
Young family 
No 
photograph 
Older couple 
Return Rate 
80% 
65% 
47% 
10% 
5% 
A. Identify the following aspects of the study as described above. 
• 
Control condition 
• 
Dependent variable 
• 
Confounding variable 
B. How might cognitive dissonance explain why people returned the wallets? 
C. How might individualistic culture explain why people did not return the wallets? 
D. How might out-group bias explain the low rate of return for the wallets with the older couple’s photograph? 
E. A survey was conducted in which individuals were asked, “Would you return a lost wallet that you found?” 
Use social desirability bias to explain whether the percentage of individuals who answered “yes” to this 
survey question would be higher, the same, or lower than the overall return rate (42%) in the study above. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-8-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-9-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 1 is reprinted for your convenience. 
1. Researchers dropped 200 identical wallets on sidewalks near a large university. Each wallet contained the name 
and address of the owner and either a photograph of a baby, a photograph of a puppy, a photograph of a young 
family, a photograph of an older couple, or no photograph. The researchers hypothesized that the type of 
photograph left in the wallet would influence the rate of return. The wallets with a photograph of the baby and 
the wallets with a photograph of the puppy were left early in the morning, the wallets with a photograph of the 
young family were left in the afternoon, and the wallets with either no photograph or a photograph of an older 
couple were left in the evening. Eighty-four of the 200 wallets (42%) were eventually mailed back to the owner, 
as shown below. 
Type of 
Photograph 
Baby 
Puppy 
Young family 
No 
photograph 
Older couple 
Return Rate 
80% 
65% 
47% 
10% 
5% 
A. Identify the following aspects of the study as described above. 
• 
Control condition 
• 
Dependent variable 
• 
Confounding variable 
B. How might cognitive dissonance explain why people returned the wallets? 
C. How might individualistic culture explain why people did not return the wallets? 
D. How might out-group bias explain the low rate of return for the wallets with the older couple’s photograph? 
E. A survey was conducted in which individuals were asked, “Would you return a lost wallet that you found?” 
Use social desirability bias to explain whether the percentage of individuals who answered “yes” to this 
survey question would be higher, the same, or lower than the overall return rate (42%) in the study above. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-10-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 1 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-11-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 2. Purvik and Nisha spent a summer day at a popular amusement park with friends. They rode roller coasters, ate 
cotton candy, and played carnival games to win prizes. Explain how each of the following might have played a 
role in their day. 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
Amygdala 
Approach-approach conflict 
Arousal theory 
Informational social influence 
Motion parallax 
Taste aversion 
Vestibular sense 
THIS PAGE MAY BE USED FOR TAKING NOTES AND PLANNING YOUR ANSWERS. 
NOTES WRITTEN ON THIS PAGE WILL NOT BE SCORED.   
WRITE ALL YOUR RESPONSES ON THE LINED PAGES. 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-12-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-13-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 2 is reprinted for your convenience. 
2. Purvik and Nisha spent a summer day at a popular amusement park with friends. They rode roller coasters, ate 
cotton candy, and played carnival games to win prizes. Explain how each of the following might have played a 
role in their day. 
• 
Amygdala 
• 
Approach-approach conflict 
• 
Arousal theory 
• 
Informational social influence 
• 
Motion parallax 
• 
Taste aversion 
• 
Vestibular sense 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-14-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-15-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 2 is reprinted for your convenience. 
2. Purvik and Nisha spent a summer day at a popular amusement park with friends. They rode roller coasters, ate 
cotton candy, and played carnival games to win prizes. Explain how each of the following might have played a 
role in their day. 
• 
Amygdala 
• 
Approach-approach conflict 
• 
Arousal theory 
• 
Informational social influence 
• 
Motion parallax 
• 
Taste aversion 
• 
Vestibular sense 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-16-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-17-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 2 is reprinted for your convenience. 
2. Purvik and Nisha spent a summer day at a popular amusement park with friends. They rode roller coasters, ate 
cotton candy, and played carnival games to win prizes. Explain how each of the following might have played a 
role in their day. 
• 
Amygdala 
• 
Approach-approach conflict 
• 
Arousal theory 
• 
Informational social influence 
• 
Motion parallax 
• 
Taste aversion 
• 
Vestibular sense 
Unauthorized copying or reuse of 
any part of this page is illegal. 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-18-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ADDITIONAL ANSWER PAGE FOR QUESTION 2 
GO ON TO THE NEXT PAGE. 
-19-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STOP 
END OF EXAM 
THE FOLLOWING INSTRUCTIONS APPLY TO THE COVERS OF THE  
SECTION II BOOKLET. 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE COMPLETED THE IDENTIFICATION  
INFORMATION AS REQUESTED ON THE FRONT AND BACK  
COVERS OF THE SECTION II BOOKLET. 
CHECK TO SEE THAT YOUR AP NUMBER LABEL APPEARS IN  
THE BOX ON THE COVER. 
MAKE SURE YOU HAVE USED THE SAME SET OF AP  
NUMBER LABELS ON ALL AP EXAMS YOU HAVE TAKEN  
THIS YEAR. 
-20-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Answer Key for AP Psychology 
Practice Exam, Section I 
Question 1: D 
Question 2: E 
Question 3: C 
Question 4: D 
Question 5: C 
Question 6: B 
Question 7: C 
Question 8: C 
Question 9: E 
Question 10: D 
Question 11: C 
Question 12: D 
Question 13: D 
Question 14: D 
Question 15: E 
Question 16: E 
Question 17: B 
Question 18: C 
Question 19: E 
Question 20: D 
Question 21: B 
Question 22: C 
Question 23: A 
Question 24: A 
Question 25: B 
Question 26: D 
Question 27: B 
Question 28: D 
Question 29: B 
Question 30: D 
Question 31: B 
Question 32: B 
Question 33: A 
Question 34: A 
Question 35: C 
Question 36: D 
Question 37: E 
Question 38: A 
Question 39: C 
Question 40: A 
Question 41: D 
Question 42: A 
Question 43: E 
Question 44: E 
Question 45: C 
Question 46: B 
Question 47: C 
Question 48: A 
Question 49: D 
Question 50: C 
Question 51: A 
Question 52: C 
Question 53: E 
Question 54: A 
Question 55: C 
Question 56: D 
Question 57: A 
Question 58: C 
Question 59: D 
Question 60: A 
Question 61: D 
Question 62: B 
Question 63: C 
Question 64: B 
Question 65: C 
Question 66: B 
Question 67: D 
Question 68: A 
Question 69: C 
Question 70: B 
Question 71: E 
Question 72: B 
Question 73: C 
Question 74: B 
Question 75: E 
Question 76: A 
Question 77: A 
Question 78: B 
Question 79: D 
Question 80: C 
Question 81: B 
Question 82: C 
Question 83: E 
Question 84: D 
Question 85: E 
Question 86: C 
Question 87: E 
Question 88: E 
Question 89: A 
Question 90: A 
Question 91: E 
Question 92: A 
Question 93: B 
Question 94: C 
Question 95: E 
Question 96: A 
Question 97: A 
Question 98: A 
Question 99: C 
Question 100: B 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Multiple-Choice Section for Psychology 
2019 Course Framework Alignment and Rationales 
Question 1  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
6.H: Explain the 
maturation of cognitive 
abilities (Piaget's stages, 
Information process). 
Cognitive Development 
in Childhood 
(A)  
Incorrect. Animism is the perception of inanimate objects as being 
alive. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Assimilation is the altering of one’s perception of an object 
to fit existing schemas. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Conservation is the ability to recognize that volume or 
quantity remain constant as their shape or arrangement changes. 
(D)  
Correct. Egocentrism is the tendency for young children to expect 
others to see the world from their perspective, as the child does here. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Object permanence is the recognition that objects still 
exist even when they are hidden. 
 
Question 2  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
5.L: Define intelligence 
and list characteristics 
of how psychologists 
measure intelligence. 
Introduction to 
Intelligence 
(A)  
Incorrect. Fluid intelligence is one’s ability to solve new problems 
quickly. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Practical intelligence is one’s ability to function in real-
world settings. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Analytical intelligence involves critical thinking and 
problem solving. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Kinesthetic intelligence involves coordination and 
movement. 
(E)  
Correct. Crystallized intelligence is the collection of information that 
one has accumulated over time. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 3  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
7.J: Identify the 
contributions of major 
researchers in 
personality theory. 
Introduction to 
Personality 
(A)  
Incorrect. Congruence between self-systems refers to one’s actual self 
being congruent with one’s ideal or ought self. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Self-efficacy is the belief in one’s competence in a specific 
domain. 
(C)  
Correct. Reciprocal determinism is Albert Bandura’s term for the 
person and the environment simultaneously influencing each other. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Locus of control refers to the tendency to see events as 
either under one’s personal control or subject to outside factors. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Group polarization refers to the tendency for a group to 
develop more extreme views than the individuals within the group 
hold. 
 
 
 
 
Question 4  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C 
7.E: Discuss the 
biological 
underpinnings of 
motivation, including 
needs, drives, and 
homeostasis. 
Specific Topics in 
Motivation 
(A)  
Incorrect. The scenario does not indicate a physiological need that 
motivates Mike to eat. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Anorexia nervosa is marked by unhealthy weight loss from 
extreme calorie restriction or exercise. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Basal metabolic rate refers to the body’s resting rate of 
energy output. 
(D)  
Correct. Set-point refers to one’s current programmed weight, and 
when the body falls below this weight, it tends to return to the 
programmed weight. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The scenario does not refer to an unlearned behavior 
throughout a species. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 5  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
5.G: Describe strategies 
for memory 
improvement and 
typical memory errors. 
Forgetting and Memory 
Distortion 
(A)  
Incorrect. Proactive interference is when older information interferes 
with the encoding of new information. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The serial position effect is the tendency to remember 
items at the beginning or end of a list. 
(C)  
Correct. The witness’s claim of having seen a green shirt produced 
the false memory of a green shirt in the other witnesses. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The McGurk effect is a perceptual error in which 
phonemes are misperceived. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The Stroop effect is when a color word, like red, is printed 
in a different color, which slows the reading of the color word. 
 
 
 
 
Question 6  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
8.I: Discuss the major 
diagnostic categories, 
including feeding and 
eating disorders, 
personality disorders, 
and their corresponding 
symptoms. 
Feeding and Eating, 
Substance and 
Addictive, and 
Personality Disorders 
(A)  
Incorrect. James does not show signs of an unhealthy dependence on 
others. 
(B)  
Correct. James’s sense of self-importance and disregard for others 
are signs of narcissistic personality disorder. 
(C)  
Incorrect. James does not show an excessive need for attention. 
(D)  
Incorrect. James does not show breaks from reality. 
(E)  
Incorrect. James does not show a pattern of compulsive behaviors 
satisfying obsessive thoughts. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 7  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C 
7.B: Compare and 
contrast motivational 
theories, including the 
strengths and 
weaknesses of each. 
Theories of Motivation 
(A)  
Incorrect. Drive-reduction typically explains motivation to meet 
biological needs rather than thrill seeking. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Adrian shows no sign of interest in an external reward to 
engage in the behavior. 
(C)  
Correct. Adrian’s experience of arousal appears to be rewarding in 
itself and the sole driving force in his thrill seeking. 
(D)  
Incorrect. There is no evidence that Adrian’s behavior is a holdover 
from adaptive behavior from his ancestors. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Adrian’s behavior does not appear to be for the purpose of 
obtaining a particular result. 
 
 
 
 
Question 8  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
9.C: Anticipate the 
impact of self-fulfilling 
prophecy on behavior. 
Attribution Theory and 
Person Perception 
(A)  
Incorrect. Jerome does not appear to be engaging in group-based 
behavior where he could be anonymous. 
(B)  
Incorrect. There is no evidence of Jerome believing that people 
generally deserve the outcomes they experience. 
(C)  
Correct. Jerome’s beliefs about his teacher resulted in his behaving in 
a way that would reinforce those beliefs. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Jerome does not appear to have psychological discomfort 
due to his behavior conflicting with his beliefs or attitudes. 
(E)  
Incorrect. There is no form of persuasion occurring in the scenario. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 9  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C 
1.C: Describe and 
compare different 
theoretical approaches 
in explaining behavior. 
Introducing Psychology 
(A)  
Incorrect. The psychodynamic perspective focuses primarily on root 
causes of behavior and psychological distress. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The behavioral perspective focuses on how rewards and 
punishments can influence behavior. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The evolutionary perspective focuses on adaptive traits 
passing down through generations. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The biopsychosocial perspective integrates psychological, 
biological, and environmental influences on behavior. 
(E)  
Correct. The humanistic perspective optimistically emphasizes 
personal growth. 
 
 
 
 
Question 10  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
4.I: Predict how 
practice, schedules of 
reinforcement, other 
aspects of 
reinforcement, and 
motivation will 
influence quality of 
learning. 
Operant Conditioning 
(A)  
Incorrect. Fixed-interval reinforcement is when reinforcement 
occurs in predictable time increments, which slot machines do not 
employ. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Fixed-ratio reinforcement is when reinforcement occurs 
after a set number of trials, which slot machines do not employ. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Variable-interval reinforcement is when reinforcement 
occurs after a variable amount of time, which slot machines do not 
employ. 
(D)  
Correct. Slot machines reward play at unpredictable numbers of 
trials, which renders the behavior resistant to extinction. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Continuous reinforcement is when reinforcement occurs 
after every trial, which slot machines do not employ. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 11  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
8.L: Describe major 
treatment orientations 
used in therapy and how 
those orientations 
influence therapeutic 
planning. 
Psychological 
Perspectives and 
Treatment of Disorders 
(A)  
Incorrect. Systematic desensitization is not commonly used to treat 
conversion disorder. A variety of treatments can be used, though 
none seem to be highly effective. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Systematic desensitization is not commonly used to treat 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Medication and cognitive therapy are 
commonly used. 
(C)  
Correct. Systematic desensitization is most commonly used to treat 
phobias. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Schizophrenia is not treated with systematic 
desensitization but most commonly with medication. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Systematic desensitization is not commonly used to treat 
generalized anxiety disorder. Medication and cognitive-behavioral 
therapy are commonly used. 
 
 
 
 
Question 12  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
5.F: Describe strategies 
for retrieving memories. 
Retrieving 
(A)  
Incorrect. Encoding devices help get information into memory. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Iconic memories are sensory memories of visual 
information. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Implicit memories are memories of which the perceiver is 
unaware. 
(D)  
Correct. The pictures are cuing memories of the event, serving to 
bring those memories from long-term into working memory. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Semantic cues are memory triggers because they are 
meaningful. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 13  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
9.K: Describe the 
variables that contribute 
to altruism and 
aggression. 
Altruism and 
Aggression 
(A)  
Incorrect. There is no evidence that Judy has frustrated Danny, 
leading to his aggression. 
(B)  
Incorrect. There is no evidence that Danny has experienced arousal 
leading to his aggression. 
(C)  
Incorrect. There is no evidence that Danny is aggressing against Judy 
out of anger. 
(D)  
Correct. Danny’s aggression occurs to achieve a goal. 
(E)  
Incorrect. There is no evidence that Danny learned his behavior from 
watching others. 
 
 
 
 
Question 14  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
2.I: Describe the 
nervous system and its 
subdivisions and 
functions in the brain. 
The Brain 
(A)  
Incorrect. The cerebellum primarily governs coordination and 
balance. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The hypothalamus governs hunger and thirst. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The parietal lobe integrates sensory information. 
(D)  
Correct. The frontal lobe governs self-control and foresight. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The corpus callosum enables the two hemispheres of the 
brain to communicate with one another. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 15  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
9.I: Predict the impact 
of the presence of others 
on individual behavior. 
Group Influences on 
Behavior and Mental 
Processes 
(A)  
Incorrect. There is no evidence that Jaci’s ethnic affiliation influences 
her perspective. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Framing is when the way something is presented affects 
the perception of it. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Groupthink would occur when the members of the group 
feel pressure to agree and avoid dissent. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Group polarization refers to the group’s attitudes 
becoming more extreme. 
(E)  
Correct. Social loafing is the tendency, which Jaci shows, to work less 
hard when others are around to compensate. 
 
 
 
 
Question 16  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
3.I: Describe the hearing 
process, including the 
specific nature of energy 
transduction, relevant 
anatomical structures, 
and specialized 
pathways in the brain 
for each of the senses. 
Auditory Sensation and 
Perception 
(A)  
Incorrect. Makayla shows no signs of perceiving one sense (such as 
sound) as another (such as sight). 
(B)  
Incorrect. Makayla does not seem to be able to detect softer sounds 
than Noah. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Makayla shows no signs of needing a bigger difference in 
pitch in order to be able to detect it. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Makayla shows no signs of distinguishing loudness than 
Noah. 
(E)  
Correct. The different instruments have different timbre or texture, 
and Makayla has a greater ability to distinguish among them. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 17  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
5.K: Identify problem-
solving strategies as well 
as factors that create 
bias and errors in 
thinking. 
Biases and Errors in 
Thinking 
(A)  
Incorrect. The availability heuristic is not directly related to self-
concept. 
(B)  
Correct. The availability heuristic refers to the use of the most 
available information to make judgments. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The fundamental attribution error refers to overestimating 
dispositional influences on people’s behavior. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The base-rate fallacy error is relevant to the 
representativeness heuristic. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Self-fulfilling prophecy is when one’s behavior reinforces 
the behavior expected by others. 
 
 
 
 
Question 18  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
5.P: Explain how 
psychologists design 
tests, including 
standardization 
strategies and other 
techniques to establish 
reliability and validity. 
Psychometric Principles 
and Intelligence Testing 
(A)  
Incorrect. Operational definitions are how a construct is represented 
in the context of a research study. 
(B)  
Incorrect. External validity refers to the generalizability of a study’s 
results. 
(C)  
Correct. Predictive validity refers to the degree to which a variable 
predicts a related behavior, as the assessment predicts success in 
college. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Content validity refers to whether an instrument measures 
the aspects of a construct it is intended to measure. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Standardization is when an assessment is administered the 
same for everyone taking it so that the scores can be compared 
statistically. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 19  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
8.F: Discuss the major 
diagnostic categories, 
including 
neurodevelopmental 
disorders, 
neurocognitive 
disorders, schizophrenia 
spectrum, and other 
psychotic disorders, and 
their corresponding 
symptoms. 
Neurodevelopmental 
and Schizophrenic 
Disorders 
(A)  
Incorrect. People with autism spectrum disorder do not have 
disorganized thinking or hallucinations. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Major depressive disorder is a mood disorder, which 
Annie does not manifest. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Annie shows no signs of intense emotionality. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Annie shows no signs of experiencing physical symptoms 
for which there is no physical cause. 
(E)  
Correct. Schizophrenia is often indicated by disorganized thinking 
and hallucinations. 
 
Question 20  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
8.P: Summarize 
effectiveness of specific 
treatments used to 
address specific 
problems from a 
biological perspective. 
Treatment of Disorders 
from the Biological 
Perspective 
(A)  
Incorrect. Person-centered therapy is unlikely to be effective in 
treating schizophrenia. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Cognitive behavioral therapy is unlikely to be effective in 
treating schizophrenia. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Psychoanalysis is unlikely to be feasible as a primary 
treatment for someone with schizophrenia. 
(D)  
Correct. Schizophrenia is most often treated with antipsychotic 
medications. 
(E)  
Incorrect. ECT is more likely to be used to treat severe depression. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 21  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C 
6.E: Identify the 
contributions of major 
researchers in 
developmental 
psychology in the area 
of social development in 
childhood. 
Social Development in 
Childhood 
(A)  
Incorrect. Authoritarian parenting tends to lead to reliance on or 
rebellion against authorities. 
(B)  
Correct. Authoritative parenting tends to facilitate self-reliance and 
confidence because children are given an age-appropriate amount of 
responsibility in decision-making about their life choices. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Permissive parenting tends not to challenge children 
enough to produce confidence and self-reliance. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Neglectful parenting tends to produce children who have 
not experienced the care to build their confidence. 
(E)  
Incorrect. “Secure” describes an attachment style but not a parenting 
style. 
 
Question 22  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
3.K: Describe sensory 
processes, including the 
specific nature of energy 
transduction, relevant 
anatomical structures, 
and specialized 
pathways in the brain 
for each of the body 
senses. 
Body Senses 
(A)  
Incorrect. The hair cells and semicircular canals are in the ear, not in 
the limbs. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The hair cells and semicircular canals are in the ear, not 
the brain, where direction would be governed. 
(C)  
Correct. The hair cells and semicircular canals in the ear are vital for 
balance, so this disruption would cause dizziness. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The hair cells and semicircular canals are not related to 
recognition of body parts. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Proprioception is governed mostly in the brain rather than 
in the ear. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 23  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
2.S: Discuss aspects of 
sleep and dreaming. 
Sleep and Dreaming 
(A)  
Correct. According to psychoanalysts, manifest content refers to the 
actual events in the dream. 
(B)  
Incorrect. According to psychoanalysts, latent content refers to what 
the dream symbolizes. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Memory consolidation is not a psychoanalytic concept, 
and this example does not describe short-term memories getting 
converted to long-term memories. 
(D)  
Incorrect. This example does not refer to the unconscious exclusion 
of uncomfortable thoughts. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Hypnagogic hallucinations are not a psychoanalytic 
concept and do not occur during dreaming but rather during the 
transition from wakefulness to sleep. 
 
 
 
 
Question 24  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
4.F: Describe basic 
classical conditioning 
phenomena. 
Classical Conditioning 
(A)  
Correct. This example illustrates how a neutral stimulus (the clock) 
became paired with an unconditioned stimulus (lunch) to produce a 
conditioned response (growling). 
(B)  
Incorrect. This example illustrates an unconditioned stimulus-
response pair (food-salivation). 
(C)  
Incorrect. This example illustrates a reflex. 
(D)  
Incorrect. This example refers to the operant conditioning concept of 
reinforcement. 
(E)  
Incorrect. This example refers to the operant conditioning concept of 
punishment. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 25  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C 
8.P: Summarize 
effectiveness of specific 
treatments used to 
address specific 
problems from a 
biological perspective. 
Treatment of Disorders 
from the Biological 
Perspective 
(A)  
Incorrect. Humanistic therapists treat disorders by providing 
unconditional positive regard, empathy, and genuineness. 
(B)  
Correct. Biomedical therapists use therapies that enact changes at a 
biological level. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Psychodynamic therapists help clients uncover the 
unconscious and explore childhood experiences. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Behavioral therapists treat psychological disorders with 
conditioning and modeling. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Cognitive therapists treat psychological disorders by 
helping clients change their maladaptive thought processes. 
 
 
 
 
Question 26  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
6.L: Predict the physical 
and cognitive changes 
that emerge through the 
lifespan, including steps 
that can be taken to 
maximize function. 
Adulthood and Aging 
(A)  
Incorrect. The neural tube closes during prenatal development. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Secondary sex characteristics develop during puberty. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Neural networking continues through childhood. 
(D)  
Correct. Sex hormones decrease in late adulthood (e.g., menopause). 
(E)  
Incorrect. Hormones tend to increase during puberty but not middle 
adulthood. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 27  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
9.A: Apply attribution 
theory to explain 
motives. 
Attribution Theory and 
Person Perception 
(A)  
Incorrect. Doug does not display low confidence. 
(B)  
Correct. Self-serving bias is when one attributes successes to oneself 
and failures to other people. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Doug did not explain his actions based on external factors 
and the team’s actions based on internal factors. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Doug did not make a global mistake in explaining the 
team’s behavior. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Doug did not redirect socially unacceptable wishes and 
desires into a more appropriate activity. 
 
 
 
 
Question 28  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
2 
5.K: Identify problem-
solving strategies as well 
as factors that create 
bias and errors in 
thinking. 
Biases and Errors in 
Thinking 
(A)  
Incorrect. Mary Alice did not approach a problem using a single 
framework. 
(B)  
Incorrect. This example does not illustrate how intelligence test 
scores have increased over time. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Mary Alice did not estimate likelihood based on how 
easily the instances came to mind. 
(D)  
Correct. Mary Alice mistakenly believed that the likelihood of 
drawing an ace was affected by previous trials. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Mary Alice did not erroneously find additional similarities 
between two things after discovering a single connection between 
them. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 29  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
5.D: Outline the 
principles that underlie 
construction and 
encoding of memories. 
Encoding 
(A)  
Incorrect. This example does not illustrate how context and 
nonverbal cues aid in understanding language. 
(B)  
Correct. This example shows how memory can be improved when 
the meaning of words is considered. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The subjects were not asked to merely repeat the words in 
this example. 
(D)  
Incorrect. This example does not illustrate an attempt to come up 
with the single best solution to a problem. 
(E)  
Incorrect. This example shows that shallow processing, counting the 
number of syllables in words, did not improve memory in the group 
that used semantic encoding. 
 
 
 
 
Question 30  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
7.P: Identify frequently 
used assessment 
strategies, and evaluate 
relative test quality 
based on reliability and 
validity of the 
instruments. 
Measuring Personality 
(A)  
Incorrect. The TAT does not measure academic or intellectual 
potential. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The TAT does not measure academic knowledge. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The TAT does not measure IQ. 
(D)  
Correct. The TAT is a test in which the test takers’ response to 
ambiguous stimuli is thought to represent something about their 
personality. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The TAT does not measure psychological functioning that 
is thought to underlie specific brain regions. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 31  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
2 
8.L: Describe major 
treatment orientations 
used in therapy and how 
those orientations 
influence therapeutic 
planning. 
Psychological 
Perspectives and 
Treatment of Disorders 
(A)  
Incorrect. The graph does not provide information about the effect 
of genetics, brain functioning, or other biological factors on the 
development of psychological disorders. 
(B)  
Correct. The graph provides information about the effect of income, 
an indicator of socioeconomic status, on the development of 
psychological disorders. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The graph does not provide information about the effect 
of conditions of worth or other humanistic concepts on the 
development of psychological disorders. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The graph does not provide information about the effect 
of the unconscious or childhood experiences on the development of 
psychological disorders. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The graph does not provide information about the effect 
of conditioning or modeling on the development of psychological 
disorders. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 32  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
5.P: Explain how 
psychologists design 
tests, including 
standardization 
strategies and other 
techniques to establish 
reliability and validity. 
Psychometric Principles 
and Intelligence Testing 
(A)  
Incorrect. Validity refers to the extent to which the test measures 
what it intends to measure. 
(B)  
Correct. Reliability refers to the consistency or stability of an 
assessment. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Experimenter-expectancy effects are ways that researchers 
may unintentionally affect the results of a study based on their 
hypothesis. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Standardization refers to the process through which 
norms and customary procedures are developed for a test. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Statistical significance refers to the extent to which a result 
occurred by chance or error alone. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 33  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
5.M: Discuss how 
culture influences the 
definition of 
intelligence. 
Introduction to 
Intelligence 
(A)  
Correct. Because comparing a set of identical twins in a shared 
environment with a set of identical twins in different environments 
controls for the effect of nature, this example shows the effect of 
environment on intelligence. 
(B)  
Incorrect. This example illustrates the effect of nature, not nurture, 
on intelligence because the identical twins were more similar than 
the fraternal twins, who share less genetic makeup than identical 
twins. 
(C)  
Incorrect. This example illustrates the effect of nature, not nurture, 
on intelligence because the fraternal twins were more similar than 
unrelated individuals, who share less genetic makeup than fraternal 
twins. 
(D)  
Incorrect. This example illustrates the effect of nature, not nurture, 
on intelligence because the siblings were more similar than unrelated 
individuals, who share less genetic makeup than siblings. 
(E)  
Incorrect. This example does not illustrate the effect of nurture 
because environment was not presented in the parings. 
 
 
Question 34  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
5.O: Identify the 
contributions of key 
researchers in 
intelligence research 
and testing. 
Introduction to 
Intelligence 
(A)  
Correct. Charles Spearman theorized that intelligence is divided into 
g, broad mental capacity, and s, specific mental abilities. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Lewis Terman is associated with publishing the English 
version of the Binet-Simon scales. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Louis Thurstone developed the method of absolute 
scaling, and he developed the Primary Mental Abilities test. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Howard Gardner supported a nine-factor intelligence 
model. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Robert Sternberg discussed three components of 
intelligence: analytic, creative, and practical. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 35  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
5.C: Identify the 
contributions of key 
researchers in cognitive 
psychology. 
Introduction to Memory 
(A)  
Incorrect. Ebbinghaus is not known for his work in the biology of 
memory and did not use imaging techniques. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Ebbinghaus primarily used himself as a subject. 
(C)  
Correct. Ebbinghaus is known for his work with memorizing 
nonsense syllables. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Ebbinghaus is not known for studying monkeys. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Ebbinghaus is not known for studying children. 
 
 
 
 
Question 36  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
2.G: Identify basic 
process of transmission 
of a signal between 
neurons. 
Neural Firing 
(A)  
Incorrect. Acetylcholine is not linked to depression. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Dopamine is not known to have a direct link to major 
depressive disorder. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Histamine is not linked to depression. 
(D)  
Correct. A lack of serotonin activity is linked to depression. 
(E)  
Incorrect. GABA is known to have a link to anxiety but not 
depression. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 37  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
2.M: Discuss the role of 
neuroplasticity in 
traumatic brain injury. 
The Adaptable Brain 
(A)  
Incorrect. Reuptake refers to neurotransmitters getting reabsorbed 
into neurons. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Dual processing refers to automatic and controlled mental 
processing, which is generally unrelated to hemispherectomy. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Accommodation refers to broadening one’s schema, and 
this is unrelated to hemispherectomy. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Myelination refers to the insulation on neural axons, and it 
is unrelated to hemispherectomy. 
(E)  
Correct. Neuroplasticity refers to the brain’s ability to adapt. In this 
example, the remaining hemisphere of Beth’s brain was able to take 
over the function of the hemisphere that was removed. 
 
 
 
 
Question 38  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
3 
1.F: Differentiate types 
of research with regard 
to purpose, strengths, 
and weaknesses. 
Research Methods in 
Psychology 
(A)  
Correct. Surveys allow a researcher to collect large amounts of data. 
(B)  
Incorrect. A case study typically involves one or a very small number 
of participants. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The study described does not describe manipulating an 
independent variable in a controlled setting. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The study described is not an observational study of 
subjects in their natural environment. 
(E)  
Incorrect. A single-subject design occurs when participants are tested 
to get a baseline, exposed to a treatment, and then retested to see if 
the treatment had an effect. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 39  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
6.H: Explain the 
maturation of cognitive 
abilities (Piaget's stages, 
Information process). 
Cognitive Development 
in Childhood 
(A)  
Incorrect. Animism is the attribution of living traits to nonliving 
objects. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Theory of mind is the ability to attribute mental states to 
others. 
(C)  
Correct. Conservation is the ability to see that quantity remains 
constant despite variations in arrangement. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Accommodation refers to the tendency to see stimuli in 
terms of preexisting schemas. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Object permanence is the ability to realize that objects 
continue to exist even when they are not visible. 
 
 
 
 
Question 40  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
6.H: Explain the 
maturation of cognitive 
abilities (Piaget's stages, 
Information process). 
Cognitive Development 
in Childhood 
(A)  
Correct. The sensorimotor stage is marked by exploring the world 
through sensory experiences. 
(B)  
Incorrect. The preoperational stage is when children exhibit 
symbolic thought but do not yet exhibit logical operations. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The concrete operational stage is marked by logical 
thought. 
(D)  
Incorrect. According to Piaget, the formal operational stage is the 
most advanced stage of cognitive development, when abstract 
thought occurs. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The postconventional stage is the most advanced stage of 
moral reasoning. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 41  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C 
7.L: Compare and 
contrast the behaviorist 
and social cognitive 
theories of personality 
with other theories of 
personality. 
Behaviorism and Social 
Cognitive Theories of 
Personality 
(A)  
Incorrect. This example is a behavior that does not imply an 
attribution. 
(B)  
Incorrect. This example illustrates the just-world phenomenon. 
(C)  
Incorrect. This example illustrates an internal locus of control. 
(D)  
Correct. This example describes an external or situational 
explanation for a behavior. 
(E)  
Incorrect. This example illustrates intrinsic reward. 
 
 
 
 
Question 42  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
1.I: Describe how 
research design drives 
the reasonable 
conclusions that can be 
drawn. 
Defining Psychological 
Science - The 
Experimental Method 
(A)  
Correct. An illusory correlation is defined as perceiving a 
relationship where one does not exist. 
(B)  
Incorrect. An illusory correlation is not a causal relationship. 
(C)  
Incorrect. A correlation of 0 is a correlation coefficient that indicates 
no relationship between two variables. 
(D)  
Incorrect. A correlation of −1.0 represents a perfect negative 
correlation coefficient. 
(E)  
Incorrect. A correlation of +1.0 represents a perfect positive 
correlation coefficient. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 43  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
9.E: Discuss attitude 
formation and change, 
including persuasion 
strategies and cognitive 
dissonance. 
Attitude Formation and 
Attitude Change 
(A)  
Incorrect. Groupthink occurs in groups when the desire for harmony 
overrides good decision making. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Social facilitation is the improved performance on tasks 
when others are present. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Anchoring is a heuristic where one starts with a reference 
point and makes judgments from that point. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The door-in-the-face technique suggests that declining a 
big request makes it more likely that someone will say yes to a future, 
smaller request. 
(E)  
Correct. The foot-in-the-door technique suggests that saying yes to a 
small request (a small shock) makes it more likely that someone will 
agree with a future, larger request (a strong shock). 
 
 
 
 
Question 44  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
3 
1.I: Describe how 
research design drives 
the reasonable 
conclusions that can be 
drawn. 
Defining Psychological 
Science - The 
Experimental Method 
(A)  
Incorrect. Perceiving order in random events is unrelated to the 
conclusion drawn by the experimenter. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Generalizing from extreme examples is unrelated to the 
research design. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Using self-report does not determine what kind of 
conclusion can be drawn. 
(D)  
Incorrect. It would be impossible to randomly assign participants to 
a large family or a small family. 
(E)  
Correct. The researchers did not conduct an experiment (i.e., 
random assignment), so they cannot draw a causal conclusion. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 45  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C 
7.H: Discuss theories of 
stress and the effects of 
stress on psychological 
and physical well-being. 
Stress and Coping 
(A)  
Incorrect. Alarm is the first reaction to stress in which an organism 
prepares to fight the stress. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Reaction is not a stage of the general adaptation syndrome. 
(C)  
Correct. Exhaustion is the final stage where coping resources are 
depleted and stress-related diseases emerge. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Resistance is the second stage of the general adaptation 
syndrome, where the body attempts to cope with stress. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Delay is not a stage of the general adaptation syndrome. 
 
 
 
 
Question 46  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C 
8.L: Describe major 
treatment orientations 
used in therapy and how 
those orientations 
influence therapeutic 
planning. 
Psychological 
Perspectives and 
Treatment of Disorders 
(A)  
Incorrect. Projection is the assignment of one’s own feelings to 
someone else. 
(B)  
Correct. Transference is when a client brings feelings about someone 
else to the therapist. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Countertransference would be the therapist bringing 
feelings about others to the client. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Sublimation is turning negative impulses into positive 
actions. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Reaction formation is acting the opposite of one’s 
unconscious drives. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 47  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C 
7.A: Identify and apply 
basic motivational 
concepts to understand 
the behavior of humans 
and other animals. 
Theories of Motivation 
(A)  
Incorrect. The cognitive perspective states that internal thoughts 
drive people’s behavior. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Homeostatic theory states that people are driven by the 
internal need for stability and consistency. 
(C)  
Correct. Incentive theory states that outside factors drive people’s 
behavior. 
(D)  
Incorrect. The evolutionary perspective holds that people’s behavior 
is guided by inherited traits that were adaptive for their ancestors. 
(E)  
Incorrect. The psychoanalytic perspective holds that people are 
driven largely by unconscious impulses. 
 
 
Question 48  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
5.B: Describe and 
differentiate 
psychological and 
physiological systems of 
memory. 
Introduction to Memory 
(A)  
Correct. Procedural memory is the implicit ability to perform an 
action (such as tying one’s shoes), and semantic memory is the 
memory for factual information (such as where one lives). 
(B)  
Incorrect. Procedural memory is indeed intact, but sensory memory 
is the immediate memory for sight and sound and does not appear to 
be dysfunctional. 
(C)  
Incorrect. The man’s semantic memory is not intact, as evidenced by 
his inability to remember where he lives; sensory memory does not 
appear to be dysfunctional in the scenario. 
(D)  
Incorrect. Episodic memory is the memory for a specific event, and 
the scenario does not reference an event; procedural memory is 
intact, as evidenced by the man’s ability to tie his shoes. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Episodic memory is the memory for a specific event, and 
the scenario does not reference an event; semantic memory is indeed 
dysfunctional, as evidenced by the man’s inability to remember 
where he lives. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 49  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A 
8.L: Describe major 
treatment orientations 
used in therapy and how 
those orientations 
influence therapeutic 
planning. 
Psychological 
Perspectives and 
Treatment of Disorders 
(A)  
Incorrect. Aversion therapy would be more likely to be used by 
behavioral therapists. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Drug therapy would be used by psychiatrists, rather than 
psychologists. 
(C)  
Incorrect. Free association would be more likely to be used by a 
psychodynamic therapist. 
(D)  
Correct. Rational-emotive behavior therapy involves the analysis of 
one’s thoughts and would be used by cognitive psychologists. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Counterconditioning would be used by behavioral 
therapists. 
 
 
 
 
Question 50  
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B 
6.H: Explain the 
maturation of cognitive 
abilities (Piaget's stages, 
Information process). 
Cognitive Development 
in Childhood 
(A)  
Incorrect. In this scenario, Megan lacks conservation. 
(B)  
Incorrect. Lillian is exhibiting avoidant attachment style. 
(C)  
Correct. William forces objects to fit his existing schemas rather 
than adapting his schemas to fit the new information. 
(D)  
Incorrect. David has accommodated his schemas, or changed his way 
of thinking about things, to distinguish between different animals. 
(E)  
Incorrect. Arturo is demonstrating object permanence. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 51 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
2.G: Identify basic
process of transmission
of a signal between
neurons.
Neural Firing 
(A) 
Correct. Parkinson’s disease is linked to low levels or falling levels of 
the neurotransmitter dopamine. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Parkinson’s disease is unrelated to availability of 
acetylcholine. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Destruction of the myelin sheath is associated with 
multiple sclerosis, not Parkinson’s disease. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Number of synapses is not a factor in Parkinson’s disease. 
(E) 
Incorrect. The actual function of the neuron’s mechanics is unrelated 
to Parkinson’s disease. 
Question 52 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
2.E: Describe the
nervous system and its
subdivisions and
functions.
Overview of the 
Nervous System and the 
Neuron 
(A) 
Incorrect. The parasympathetic nervous system contracts the pupils. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Bladder contraction is inhibited with sympathetic nervous 
system activation. 
(C) 
Correct. Digestion accelerates with activation of the parasympathetic 
nervous system. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Adrenaline secretion accelerates with sympathetic nervous 
system activation. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Salivation increases with parasympathetic nervous system 
activation. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 53 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
5.E: Outline the
principles that underlie
effective storage of
memories.
Storing 
(A) 
Incorrect. Homeostasis is the motivational factor driving toward 
stability. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Instinct is an innate behavior and does not involve 
practice. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Discriminative learning involves the distinction of 
different stimuli, rather than automatic task performance. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Self-efficacy is one’s sense of competence in a specific 
domain. 
(E) 
Correct. Overlearning renders a task automatic when it had been 
effortful. 
Question 54 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
5.L: Define intelligence
and list characteristics
of how psychologists
measure intelligence.
Introduction to 
Intelligence 
(A) 
Correct. The Flynn effect is the gradual rise in IQ scores across 
generations. Since the average IQ score is meant to be 100, a rise in 
the IQ score of a population would mean that the scores should be 
renormed so the mean remains 100. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The Flynn effect does not question the validity of a given 
year’s IQ scores. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The Flynn effect does not refer to ethnic or racial 
differences in scores. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The Flynn effect does not question the reliability of IQ 
tests within a given cohort. 
(E) 
Incorrect. The Flynn effect does not refer to changes in an 
individual’s IQ scores. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 55 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
5.O: Identify the
contributions of key
researchers in
intelligence research
and testing.
Introduction to 
Intelligence 
(A) 
Incorrect. Terman did not find that gifted children are more likely to 
experience psychological problems. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Terman found that gifted children are generally adept at 
interacting with peers. 
(C) 
Correct. Terman found that gifted children generally have higher 
levels of these socio-emotional characteristics. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Intelligence scores are generally consistent for most 
people. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Gifted children are not more likely to experience marital 
or relational problems than other people. 
Question 56 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
4.F: Describe basic
classical conditioning
phenomena.
Classical Conditioning 
(A) 
Incorrect. Spontaneous recovery is the reemergence of an association 
after extinction has occurred. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Secondary reinforcement is an operant conditioning 
principle, but the scenario above describes classical conditioning. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Latent learning is learning that takes place without 
reinforcement and below conscious awareness. 
(D) 
Correct. Ahmet’s reaction shows that his reaction is not specific to 
real dogs. It has generalized to a toy dog. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Shaping is the reinforcement of complex operations that 
are increasingly gradual. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 57 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
2.S: Discuss aspects of
sleep and dreaming.
Sleep and Dreaming 
(A) 
Correct. The circadian rhythm is the biological 24-hour sleep-wake 
cycle that could be disrupted by traveling across time zones. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Stages of sleep do not alter their order. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Travel would not affect the amplitude of the waves 
associated with deep sleep. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Narcolepsy is a sleep disorder characterized by excessive 
sleepiness; however, someone would not acquire this disorder after 
long air travel. 
(E) 
Incorrect. REM rebound is an increase in REM sleep and dreaming 
after a period of lower REM sleep; however, it would not be 
associated with increased lethargy. 
Question 58 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
3 
1.F: Differentiate types
of research with regard
to purpose, strengths,
and weaknesses.
Research Methods in 
Psychology 
(A) 
Incorrect. Dr. Jones did not track the participants over time. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Dr. Jones did not combine longitudinal and cross-
sectional designs in the study. 
(C) 
Correct. Dr. Jones measured IQ for each of the three groups at one 
point in time. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Dr. Jones did not manipulate an independent variable or 
use random assignment. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Dr. Jones did not observe individuals in a natural or 
artificial environment. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 59 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C
7.M: Compare and
contrast humanistic
theories of personality
with other theories of
personality.
Humanistic Theories of 
Personality 
(A) 
Incorrect. The psychoanalytic perspective focuses on the roles of the 
id, ego, and superego. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The social cognitive perspective focuses on the role of 
environment and thought processes. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The trait perspective focuses on characteristic differences 
among individuals. 
(D) 
Correct. The humanistic perspective focuses on helping individuals 
grow and reach their maximal potential. 
(E) 
Incorrect. The biological perspective focuses on the role of genetics, 
anatomy, and physiological processes. 
Question 60 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
3.F: Describe the vision
process, including the
specific nature of energy
transduction, relevant
anatomical structures,
and specialized
pathways in the brain
for each of the senses.
Visual Anatomy 
(A) 
Correct. The cones are responsible for color vision. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The rods are responsible for noncolor vision and 
peripheral vision. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The rods are not responsible for color vision. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The pupil is the opening of the eye through which light 
passes. 
(E) 
Incorrect. The lens bends light, directing it to the retina. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 61 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
8.G: Discuss the major
diagnostic categories,
including anxiety
disorders, bipolar and
related disorders,
depressive disorders,
obsessive-compulsive
and related disorders,
and their corresponding
symptoms.
Bipolar, Depressive, 
Anxiety, and Obsessive-
Compulsive and Related 
Disorders 
(A) 
Incorrect. Belinda did not have repetitive thoughts or behaviors. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Belinda did not have a manic episode. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Belinda did not have delusions, hallucinations, 
disorganized speech, abnormal motor activity, or negative 
symptoms. 
(D) 
Correct. These symptoms are consistent with a diagnosis of a major 
depressive episode. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Belinda did not have pronounced, disproportionate, and 
repeated fear in situations where escape might be difficult or help 
would be unavailable. 
Question 62 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
2 
1.L: Apply basic
descriptive statistical
concepts, including
interpreting and
constructing graphs and
calculating simple
descriptive statistics.
Statistical Analysis in 
Psychology 
(A) 
Incorrect. Three represents the minimum number in the data set. 
(B) 
Correct. Eleven is the arithmetic average of this data set. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Twelve is the median in this data set. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Thirteen is not the correct mean in this data set. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Eighteen is the mean for data set B. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 63 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
2 
1.L: Apply basic
descriptive statistical
concepts, including
interpreting and
constructing graphs and
calculating simple
descriptive statistics.
Statistical Analysis in 
Psychology 
(A) 
Incorrect. The range is the maximum value minus the minimum 
value in the data set. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The range is the maximum value minus the minimum 
value in the data set. 
(C) 
Correct. The range is the maximum value minus the minimum value 
in the data set: twenty minus 16 equals four. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The range is the maximum value minus the minimum 
value in the data set. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Eighteen is the median, mean, and mode of this data set. 
Question 64 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
2 
1.L: Apply basic
descriptive statistical
concepts, including
interpreting and
constructing graphs and
calculating simple
descriptive statistics.
Statistical Analysis in 
Psychology 
(A) 
Incorrect. Set A has no mode. 
(B) 
Correct. The standard deviation for set A is larger than the standard 
deviation for set B. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The mean for set B is 18, while the mean for set A is 11. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Data set A does not have a bell-shared curve. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Set B’s data shows neither positive nor negative skew. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 65 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
3 
1.F: Differentiate types
of research with regard
to purpose, strengths,
and weaknesses.
Research Methods in 
Psychology 
(A) 
Incorrect. The researchers do not manipulate an independent 
variable or employ random assignment. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The researchers do not collect numeric data. 
(C) 
Correct. The researchers are conducting in-depth, qualitative 
examinations of a few individuals. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The researchers do not test a variable on preexisting 
groups. 
(E) 
Incorrect. The researchers do not observe subjects in their natural 
environments. 
Question 66 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
2.I: Describe the
nervous system and its
subdivisions and
functions in the brain.
The Brain 
(A) 
Incorrect. The ventromedial hypothalamus is associated with 
satiation. 
(B) 
Correct. The lateral hypothalamus is associated with promoting 
eating behavior. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The thalamus is the sensory relay station of the brain. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The somatosensory cortex receives sensory input from the 
body. 
(E) 
Incorrect. The pons is associated with sleep behavior and other 
autonomic functions. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 67 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
2.J: Identify the
contributions of key
researchers to the study
of the brain.
The Brain 
(A) 
Incorrect. The primary somatosensory cortex receives sensory input 
from the body. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The primary motor cortex controls voluntary bodily 
movements. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The locus coeruleus is involved in stress reactions. 
(D) 
Correct. Broca’s area is involved in speech production. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Wernicke’s area is involved in speech reception. 
Question 68 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
5.D: Outline the
principles that underlie
construction and
encoding of memories.
Encoding 
(A) 
Correct. A cognitive map is a mental layout of one’s environment 
acquired through experience. 
(B) 
Incorrect. A prototype is the best example of an item in a given 
category. 
(C) 
Incorrect. An algorithm is a problem-solving strategy that guarantees 
a solution. 
(D) 
Incorrect. A mental set is a tendency to approach a problem in one 
particular way. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Functional fixedness is the inability to see an alternative, 
nontraditional use for an object. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 69 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
4.F: Describe basic
classical conditioning
phenomena.
Classical Conditioning 
(A) 
Incorrect. Acquisition is the initial linking of a neutral stimulus with 
the unconditioned stimulus. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Discrimination is when one can differentiate between a 
conditioned stimulus and another stimulus that has not been paired 
with an unconditioned stimulus. 
(C) 
Correct. Extinction occurs after repeated presentations of the 
conditioned stimulus without the unconditioned stimulus lead to the 
conditioned stimulus no longer occurring. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Backward conditioning is when the unconditioned 
stimulus is presented before the neutral stimulus. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Stimulus generalization is the tendency to respond in the 
same way to different but similar stimuli. 
Question 70 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
4.H: Predict the effects
of operant conditioning.
Operant Conditioning 
(A) 
Incorrect. Primary reinforcers are innate and typically biological. 
(B) 
Correct. Secondary reinforcers, such as tokens, are reinforcers that 
are not innate or biological and that can be turned in for another 
reinforcer that is more desired. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Negative reinforcement is a way of increasing a behavior 
by taking something undesirable away. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Vicarious reinforcement is learning by watching others 
being rewarded. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Aversive reinforcement is unrelated to the use of tokens. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 71 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
2.E: Describe the
nervous system and its
subdivisions and
functions.
Overview of the 
Nervous System and the 
Neuron 
(A) 
Incorrect. The midbrain helps coordinate sensory information with 
simple movements. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The forebrain is responsible for motor control, relaying 
sensory information, and controlling autonomic functions. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The sympathetic nervous system activates the fight-or-
flight response. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The parasympathetic controls the rest-and-digest 
response. 
(E) 
Correct. The somatic nervous system controls voluntary motor 
output. 
Question 72 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
1.E: Distinguish the
different domains of
psychology.
Introducing Psychology 
(A) 
Incorrect. The behavioral perspective emphasizes the role of rewards 
and punishments in guiding behavior. 
(B) 
Correct. Positive psychology is the focus on thriving rather than 
disordered or maladaptive mentality and behavior. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Functionalism focuses on the purpose of consciousness. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The psychodynamic perspective emphasizes the role of 
unconscious drives in guiding behavior. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Motivational approaches focus on incentives and drives 
that guide behavior. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 73 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
8.G: Discuss the major
diagnostic categories,
including anxiety
disorders, bipolar and
related disorders,
depressive disorders,
obsessive-compulsive
and related disorders,
and their corresponding
symptoms.
Bipolar, Depressive, 
Anxiety, and Obsessive-
Compulsive and Related 
Disorders 
(A) 
Incorrect. Connie does not have a specific source of intense anxiety. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Connie’s anxiety is more diffuse and not as acute as would 
be the case with panic disorder. 
(C) 
Correct. Generalized anxiety disorder is marked by nonspecific, 
heightened arousal such as Connie demonstrates. 
(D) 
Incorrect. There is no indication that Connie’s anxiety is the result of 
a traumatic experience in her past. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Somatization disorder refers to complaints of physical 
symptoms with no apparent cause. 
Question 74 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
3.B: Discuss basic
principles of sensory
transduction, including
absolute threshold,
difference threshold,
signal detection, and
sensory adaptation.
Principles of Sensation 
(A) 
Incorrect. John is showing the opposite of sensitization, as he is 
becoming less attuned to the stimuli around him. 
(B) 
Correct. Habituation refers to the decreasing sensitivity to a constant 
stimulus over time. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Accommodation is the tendency to adjust one’s schemas 
to incorporate new information. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Signal detection theory focuses on whether or not a 
stimulus will be perceived and does not predict a steady decline in 
sensitivity to the stimulus. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Conduction deafness is when the ear is physically less 
likely to detect a stimulus, not when the constant presentation of a 
stimulus decreases the noticeability of the stimulus. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 75 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
5.B: Describe and
differentiate
psychological and
physiological systems of
memory.
Introduction to Memory 
(A) 
Incorrect. Jeffrey’s friend did not ask him to confirm where they 
went, which would assess recognition memory. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Free association is the psychoanalytic technique of saying 
the first thing that comes to mind at the mention of a stimulus word. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The method of loci is an intentional memory strategy, but 
Jeffrey’s friend is assessing incidental recall. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Implicit memory is any memory that Jeffrey would have 
but not be aware he has it. 
(E) 
Correct. Episodic memory is memory for a specific event, such as a 
vacation. 
Question 76 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
4.H: Predict the effects
of operant conditioning.
Operant Conditioning 
(A) 
Correct. Positive reinforcement is when the addition of a stimulus 
increases the rate of responding. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Negative reinforcement is when a stimulus is removed, 
yielding an increase in response rate. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The reinforcement in the scenario is primary, not 
secondary. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Negative punishment is when removal of a desired 
stimulus decreases the rate of response. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Positive punishment is when a negative stimulus is 
presented that decreases the rate of response. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 77 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
3.D: Discuss how
experience and culture
can influence perceptual
processes.
Principles of Perception 
(A) 
Correct. The context of Alice’s experience influences her perception 
of the clerk’s speech. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The Müller-Lyer illusion is a visual phenomenon in which 
two lines of the same length appear to be different length. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Weber’s law says that the size of a just noticeable 
difference is proportional to the size of the stimulus. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Figure-ground organization is the ability to distinguish a 
figure from the background. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Sound constancy is the tendency to perceive sounds as 
being the same, even though their sensation changes. 
Question 78 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
6.C: Discuss maturation
of motor skills.
The Lifespan and 
Physical Development 
in Childhood 
(A) 
Incorrect. Standardized testing is when each time a test is given a 
standard procedure is followed so that scores on the test can be 
compared. 
(B) 
Correct. Developmental norms refers to the typical rates at which 
developmental milestones are reached. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Reliability refers to the consistency of scores across raters, 
items, or time. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Validity refers to whether a test measures what it is 
intended to measure. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Inferential statistics is the extrapolation of data from a 
sample to a population. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 79 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
6.H: Explain the
maturation of cognitive
abilities (Piaget's stages,
Information process).
Cognitive Development 
in Childhood 
(A) 
Incorrect. Conventional reasoning is a moral process not evident in 
the scenario. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Sydney’s reaction is unrelated to his idea of himself. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Sydney’s reaction is unrelated to the gender with which he 
identifies. 
(D) 
Correct. If he had not achieved object permanence, Sydney would 
not think about his father when he is out of sight. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Conservation is the recognition that volume and number 
remain constant despite changes in arrangement or shape; this is 
unrelated to Sydney’s experience. 
Question 80 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
3 
1.I: Describe how
research design drives
the reasonable
conclusions that can be
drawn.
Defining Psychological 
Science - The 
Experimental Method 
(A) 
Incorrect. Survey research generally does not allow for causal claims. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Survey research generally does not allow for causal claims. 
"Leads to" is causal language. 
(C) 
Correct. High levels of empathy are associated with low levels of 
enjoyment, indicating a negative correlation. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The two variables are negatively, not positively, correlated. 
(E) 
Incorrect. There is no indication that the correlation is unreliable or 
yields inconsistent measurements. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 81 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
9.F: Identify the
contributions of key
researchers in the areas
of conformity,
compliance, and
obedience.
Conformity, 
Compliance, and 
Obedience 
(A) 
Incorrect. The warden did not explicitly instruct the guards to act as 
they did. 
(B) 
Correct. The researchers claim that playing the part of a prison 
guard induces abuse of power. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Because roles were assigned randomly, aggressive 
dispositions should have been evenly distributed in the different 
roles. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Because roles were assigned randomly, home climate 
should have been evenly distributed in the different roles. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Because roles were assigned randomly, genetic factors 
such as testosterone levels should have been evenly distributed in the 
different roles. 
Question 82 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
8.I: Discuss the major
diagnostic categories,
including feeding and
eating disorders,
personality disorders,
and their corresponding
symptoms.
Feeding and Eating, 
Substance and 
Addictive, and 
Personality Disorders 
(A) 
Incorrect. Steve does not show the extreme emotionality typical of 
borderline personality disorder. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Steve does not demonstrate the lack of positive affect 
indicative of major depressive disorder. 
(C) 
Correct. Steve’s remorseless actions are indicative of antisocial 
personality disorder. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Steve does not demonstrate the detachment from reality 
typical of schizophrenia. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Steve shows no signs of anxiety. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 83 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
2 
7.B: Compare and
contrast motivational
theories, including the
strengths and
weaknesses of each.
Theories of Motivation 
(A) 
Incorrect. Homeostasis is the drive toward stability and consistency 
and is unrelated to performance. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The general adaptation syndrome explains responses to 
stress, not the relationship between arousal and performance. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The misattribution of arousal is the tendency to believe 
that arousal is due to factors other than its actual source. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The self-serving bias is the tendency to attribute outcomes 
to factors that are flattering to the self. 
(E) 
Correct. The Yerkes-Dodson law states that performance is highest 
at moderate levels of arousal. 
Question 84 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
7.A: Identify and apply
basic motivational
concepts to understand
the behavior of humans
and other animals.
Theories of Motivation 
(A) 
Incorrect. Greg is extrinsically motivated by his employer’s 
conditions. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Andy is extrinsically motivated by money. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Carlota is extrinsically motivated by her desire to buy a 
home. 
(D) 
Correct. Intrinsic motivation comes from within oneself, as is the 
case with Savitri. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Ray is extrinsically motivated by money. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 85 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
9.F: Identify the
contributions of key
researchers in the areas
of conformity,
compliance, and
obedience.
Conformity, 
Compliance, and 
Obedience 
(A) 
Incorrect. Participants’ gender was not a central factor in the 
experiment. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Groupthink is the tendency to value group cohesion over 
good decision making and is irrelevant to the scenario. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Social inhibition is the tendency to perform more poorly 
when others are watching. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Arousal was not a central factor in the experiment. 
(E) 
Correct. Anonymity was the independent variable in the experiment 
and contributed to deindividuation. 
Question 86 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
5.I: Identify problem-
solving strategies as well
as factors that influence
their effectiveness.
Introduction to 
Thinking and Problem 
Solving 
(A) 
Incorrect. Achariya did not employ a formula or sure-fire way to 
determine whom to ask. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The availability heuristic is the tendency to attribute 
outcomes to things that are in the forefront of one’s mind and is 
unrelated to the scenario. 
(C) 
Correct. The elderly woman most closely resembles Achariya’s 
schema for a kind person. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Achariya did not attempt multiple solutions until she 
found one that worked. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Achariya did not show creative problem solving by 
thinking in unconventional ways and generating many possible 
ideas. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 87 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
3.F: Describe the vision
process, including the
specific nature of energy
transduction, relevant
anatomical structures,
and specialized
pathways in the brain
for each of the senses.
Visual Anatomy 
(A) 
Incorrect. The blind spot is where the optic nerve attaches to the 
retina. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Lens accommodation, the ability of the eye to change its 
focus from near to far, is unrelated to color vision. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The detection of white light is primarily rod-based, 
whereas color vision involves cones. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Light and dark adaptation involves the iris and pupil and 
is not directly related to color vision. 
(E) 
Correct. Negative afterimages are the tendency to perceive a color’s 
opposite end of the spectrum (its opponent) after exposure to the 
original color. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 88 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
3 
1.H: Identify
independent,
dependent,
confounding, and
control variables in
experimental designs.
Defining Psychological 
Science - The 
Experimental Method 
(A) 
Incorrect. The placebo effect is when participants think they are in 
the experimental condition and show the effects of the treatment, 
even though they are in the control condition. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Random selection refers to how a sample is assembled, not 
the actual study. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The study in the scenario is an experiment, not a 
correlational study. 
(D) 
Incorrect. A single-blind design is when either the researcher OR the 
participants (not both) do not know which group is administered the 
experimental treatment and which is administered the control. In 
this case, both the participants and the researchers were not aware 
which group received which treatment. 
(E) 
Correct. A double-blind design is when neither the researcher nor 
the participant knows which condition the participant is in. 
Question 89 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.C
5.N: Compare and
contrast historic and
contemporary theories
of intelligence.
Introduction to 
Intelligence 
(A) 
Correct. Analytical intelligence refers to the ability to think logically 
and critically. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Spatial intelligence involves imagery, not algorithms such 
as in mathematics. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Linguistic intelligence involves communication, not 
mathematics. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Intrapersonal intelligence involves having an ability to 
interact effectively with others. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Kinesthetic intelligence involves movement and 
coordination, not mathematics. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 90 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
8.H: Discuss the major
diagnostic categories,
including dissociative
disorders, somatic
symptom and related
disorders, and trauma- 
and stressor-related
disorders and their
corresponding
symptoms.
Trauma- and Stressor-
Related, Dissociative, 
and Somatic Sympton 
and Related Disorders 
(A) 
Correct. Conversion disorder is when someone complains about 
physical symptoms for which there is no physiological basis. It is 
classified with the somatic symptom and related disorders in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 
(DSM-5™). 
(B) 
Incorrect. Generalized anxiety disorder is when someone has free-
floating anxiety. It is classified with the anxiety disorders in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 
(DSM-5™). 
(C) 
Incorrect. Dissociative identity disorder, previously called multiple 
personality disorder, is when someone escapes from reality, usually 
something like abuse, by creating distinct personalities. It is classified 
with the dissociative disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5™). 
(D) 
Incorrect. Kleptomania is when someone has a recurrent urge to 
steal, typically without regard for profit. It is classified with the 
disruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders in the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5™). 
(E) 
Incorrect. Schizophrenia is a thought disorder. It is classified with 
the schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disorders in the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition 
(DSM-5™). 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 91 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
5.K: Identify problem-
solving strategies as well
as factors that create
bias and errors in
thinking.
Biases and Errors in 
Thinking 
(A) 
Incorrect. In classical conditioning, spontaneous recovery occurs 
when a previously extinguished behavior reemerges. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Reversibility is the ability to understand that things can be 
changed back to their original forms. 
(C) 
Incorrect. A prototype is a mental example that serves as a standard 
against which other items within the same category can be 
compared. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Insight is when a solution to a problem suddenly presents 
itself in an ah-ha moment. 
(E) 
Correct. A mental set is a problem-solving method that continues to 
be applied because it was successful in the past even though it is now 
defunct. 
Question 92 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
8.L: Describe major
treatment orientations
used in therapy and how
those orientations
influence therapeutic
planning.
Psychological 
Perspectives and 
Treatment of Disorders 
(A) 
Correct. Unconditional positive regard is a technique employed in 
person-centered therapy, which falls under the humanistic 
perspective. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Free association is a psychoanalytic technique. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Systematic desensitization is a behavioral technique. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The use of a token economy is a behavioral technique. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Contingency management is a behavioral technique. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 93 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
9.A: Apply attribution
theory to explain
motives.
Attribution Theory and 
Person Perception 
(A) 
Incorrect. The fundamental attribution error is when someone 
attributes another individual’s behavior to internal characteristics 
rather than the situation. 
(B) 
Correct. The just-world hypothesis is when someone believes that 
bad things happen to bad people and good things happen to good 
people. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The out-group homogeneity bias is the assumption that all 
members of a group to which a person does not belong are more 
similar to one another than the members of the group to which the 
individual belongs. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The availability heuristic is the tendency to believe that 
things that readily come to mind are common. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Self-handicapping is a self-esteem preserving technique 
where an individual may create an obstacle to impede success if they 
fear failure. 
Question 94 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
2.O: Describe various
states of consciousness
and their impact on
behavior.
The Adaptable Brain 
(A) 
Incorrect. The participants were considered under hypnosis in these 
studies. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The participants did not experience delusions, 
hallucinations, or disorganized speech. 
(C) 
Correct. The researchers believed that the participants’ behaviors 
were dissociated from their conscious minds. 
(D) 
Incorrect. The researchers did not believe that the participants were 
keeping the pain out of conscious awareness to avoid anxiety. 
(E) 
Incorrect. The participants were not sleeping. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 95 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
3.F: Describe the vision
process, including the
specific nature of energy
transduction, relevant
anatomical structures,
and specialized
pathways in the brain
for each of the senses.
Visual Anatomy 
(A) 
Incorrect. Relative size, judging smaller objects to be farther away, is 
a monocular cue. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Interposition, judging one object to be farther away if 
blocked by another, is a monocular cue. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Texture gradient, judging an object with visible texture as 
being closer than one without visible texture, is a monocular cue. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Linear perspective, viewing the convergence of parallel 
lines as an indicator of distance, is a monocular cue. 
(E) 
Correct. Retinal disparity, the slight difference in images seen by the 
left and right eyes, is a binocular cue. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 96 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.B
7.B: Compare and
contrast motivational
theories, including the
strengths and
weaknesses of each.
Theories of Motivation 
(A) 
Correct. The evolutionary theory of motivation suggests that women 
gravitate toward men who can provide resources and that men 
gravitate toward women who are young because these conditions 
maximize the likelihood of producing offspring and passing forward 
genetic material into the next generation. 
(B) 
Incorrect. The hierarchy of needs theory of motivation suggests that 
individuals must satisfy more basic needs before attaining self-
actualization. 
(C) 
Incorrect. The arousal theory of motivation suggests that humans 
strive for an optimal level of arousal. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Instinct theory does not apply here because an instinct 
must follow the same pattern across all humans. In this example, all 
women would gravitate toward men who can provide resources, and 
all men would gravitate toward women who are young. 
(E) 
Incorrect. The drive-reduction theory of motivation suggests that 
humans want to satisfy physiological needs to maintain homeostasis. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 97 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
2 
1.L: Apply basic
descriptive statistical
concepts, including
interpreting and
constructing graphs and
calculating simple
descriptive statistics.
Statistical Analysis in 
Psychology 
(A) 
Correct. Individuals high in pessimism tended to have more 
symptoms, while individuals with low pessimism had fewer 
symptoms. This is a positive correlation because there is an upward 
slope from left to right in the scatterplot. 
(B) 
Incorrect. A negative correlation would demonstrate the opposite 
pattern: individuals high in pessimism would have few symptoms. If 
this were a negative correlation there would be a downward slope 
from the left to the right in the scatterplot. 
(C) 
Incorrect. A zero correlation scatterplot would show the full range of 
symptoms for each of the possible pessimism values. If the 
correlation was zero there would be no trend in the data in the 
scatterplot. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Participants were not randomly assigned to different 
conditions of an independent variable to determine an effect on a 
dependent variable; therefore, cause and effect cannot be concluded. 
(E) 
Incorrect. An illusory correlation occurs when individuals believe a 
relation exists between two variables but a relation does not exist. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 98 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
2 
7.O: Compare and
contrast trait theories of
personality with other
theories of personality.
Trait Theories of 
Personality 
(A) 
Correct. The prompt demonstrates that Raven is low in neuroticism 
(emotionally stable and relaxed), high in agreeableness (trusting and 
cooperative), low in extraversion (prefers staying at home to going 
out socially), and high in conscientiousness (self-disciplined). 
(B) 
Incorrect. Raven is not high in extraversion. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Raven is not low in agreeableness. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Raven is not high in neuroticism. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Raven is neither low in agreeableness nor high in 
extraversion. 
Question 99 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
7.N: Speculate how
cultural context can
facilitate or constrain
personality
development, especially
as it relates to self-
concept.
Humanistic Theories of 
Personality 
(A) 
Incorrect. Ethnocentrism occurs when someone uses their own 
culture’s customs to evaluate other cultures. 
(B) 
Incorrect. Prejudice is a negative attitude about a group. 
(C) 
Correct. Collectivism is the tendency to prize cohesiveness and the 
group over the individual. 
(D) 
Incorrect. Ego defenses are anxiety reducing strategies to keep 
inappropriate wishes and desires out of conscious awareness. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Cognitive dissonance occurs when a person experiences 
tension because their actions do not align with their beliefs. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Question 100 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
1.A
8.P: Summarize
effectiveness of specific
treatments used to
address specific
problems from a
biological perspective.
Treatment of Disorders 
from the Biological 
Perspective 
(A) 
Incorrect. Bipolar disorder is associated with underactivity of 
serotonin and overactivity of norepinephrine. 
(B) 
Correct. Generalized anxiety disorder is associated with 
underactivity of GABA. 
(C) 
Incorrect. Antisocial personality disorder is associated with 
underactivity of serotonin. 
(D) 
Incorrect. There is not a single neurotransmitter most associated 
with schizoid personality disorder, and medication is not particularly 
effective to treat it. 
(E) 
Incorrect. Schizophrenia is associated with overactivity of dopamine. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
AP®  PSYCHOLOGY 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 1 
Researchers dropped 200 identical wallets on sidewalks near a large university. Each wallet contained  
the name and address of the owner and either a photograph of a baby, a photograph of a puppy, a photograph 
of a young family, a photograph of an older couple, or no photograph. The researchers hypothesized that  
the type of photograph left in the wallet would influence the rate of return. The wallets with a photograph  
of the baby and the wallets with a photograph of the puppy were left early in the morning, the wallets with  
a photograph of the young family were left in the afternoon, and the wallets with either no photograph  
or a photograph of an older couple were left in the evening. Eighty-four of the 200 wallets (42%) were 
eventually mailed back to the owner, as shown below. 
Type of 
Photograph 
Baby 
Puppy 
Young family 
No 
photograph 
Older couple 
Return Rate 
80% 
65% 
47% 
10% 
5% 
A. Identify the following aspects of the study as described above. 
Control condition 
Dependent variable 
Confounding variable 
B. How might cognitive dissonance explain why people returned the wallets? 
C. How might individualistic culture explain why people did not return the wallets? 
D. How might out-group bias explain the low rate of return for the wallets with the older couple’s photograph? 
E. A survey was conducted in which individuals were asked, “Would you return a lost wallet that you 
found?” Use social desirability bias to explain whether the percentage of individuals who answered 
“yes” to this survey question would be higher, the same, or lower than the overall return rate (42%)  
in the study above. 
General Considerations 
1. Answers should be presented in sentences and must be cogent enough for the meaning of the response
to come through. Spelling and grammatical mistakes do not reduce the score of a response, but spelling
must be close enough that the reader is convinced of the word. 
2. Do not score any notes made on the question section of the booklet. Score only what has been written 
in the blanks provided in the booklet. 
3. Definitions alone will not score, but they may be used to enhance the application. 
4. Within a point, a student will not be penalized for misinformation unless it directly contradicts 
correct information that would otherwise have scored a point. A correct application with an incorrect 
definition is not considered a direct contradiction and should score the point. 
5. Rubric examples provided for each point are not to be considered exhaustive. 
6. Responses that simply parrot or repeat the terms from the question will not score. 
7. A response can score a point only if it clearly conveys what part of the question is being answered.  
It is possible to infer what part of the question is being answered if it is consistent with the order of 
the question. 
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 1 (continued) 
Point 1: Control condition 
Response must include text referring to the wallet without a photograph being the control condition. 
Score: “The control condition in this experiment was no photograph in the wallet.” 
Score: “The control condition is what receives no treatment or manipulation. In the experiment,  
the wallet with no picture is the control because it received no treatment/picture” 
Do NOT score references to procedures that reflect other ways that the researcher may exert control 
over the procedures, including experimental control.  
Point 2: Dependent variable 
Response must include text about rate of return of the wallets or the quantity/percentage of returned wallets. 
Score: “The dependent variable is the rate of return (%) for the wallets.” 
Score: “The dependent variable is what is measured by the researchers and thus is the percentage  
of photos returned by each type of photo in the wallets.”  
Do NOT score references to how fast the wallets were returned. 
Do NOT score references to the independent variable.  
Point 3: Confounding variable 
Response must include text about the fact that the wallets with the different photographs were left at different 
times of day. 
Score: “The confounding variable is the time of day that the wallets were dropped.” 
Score: “Confounding variable is an uncontrolled variable that would mess up the experiment. In this 
case, time of day the wallet was dropped off is a confounding variable because people might be more 
willing to take a wallet under cover of darkness.”  
Score: “The confounding variable is time, either they dropped off the wallets in the morning, evening, 
or the afternoon. This is a changing variable that could possibly have played an influence in the study 
but is not the independent variable.” 
Do NOT score references to time alone, unless it illustrates that time of day varied in tandem with  
the independent variable.  
Point 4: Cognitive dissonance 
Response must include text that returning the wallets is an attempt to reduce the tension or anxiety caused  
by conflicting personal beliefs or actions about whether or not to keep the wallet. 
Score: “Cognitive dissonance can explain the reasoning of people returning the wallets because  
of tension caused by the misalignment of actions and thinking. They think they are a good person  
and taking the wallet would not match the behavior of a good person, so they return the wallet to ease 
their tension.”  
Score: “Cognitive dissonance is when someone has two beliefs that contradict each other. This causes 
discomfort, which leads to someone to either change their behavior or their reasoning. If the person 
who found the wallet and wanted to keep the money but felt it was morally correct to return it, they 
would return the wallet to make themselves feel better.” 
Do NOT score references to emotion alone, unless it is clear that the feelings are caused by an internal 
conflict between beliefs and behavior. 
Do NOT score references to empathy as reasons for returning the wallet.  
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 1 (continued) 
Point 5: Individualistic culture 
Response must include text about how individualistic culture, with its the emphasis on the self and one’s  
own goals, would make one less likely to return the wallet. 
Score: “Individualistic culture contributes to the reason why some may not have returned the wallet 
because the idea of individualistic culture is that one’s self should be put before anyone else.”  
Score: “Individualistic cultures describe how an individual’s choices should be self-serving first.  
Thus, some people would not return the wallet because it benefits them personally. ”  
Do NOT score references to collectivistic culture alone. 
Point 6: Out-group bias 
Response must include t ext about the people picking up the wallets are likely to be young. Because the photo 
is of an older couple, it is less likely they would return the wallet for a member of a different group. 
Score: “Outgroup-bias is a bias against ‘them,’ the people who are not a part of our in-group.  
This explains the low rate of return for the wallets with the older couple because it is unlikely that  
they are members of the in-group typically found on a university campus.”  
Score: “The people who found the wallet are most likely to be college students and probably did  
not feel obligated to return a wallet belonging to an older couple that is not part of their group  
(younger people). These younger people could not connect to the older people since they are not  
the same or even similar to them.”  
Do NOT score references to prejudice or simple dislike of the group shown in the photo. 
Do NOT score references to in-group bias alone.   
Point 7: Social Desirability Bias 
Response must include text that clearly refers to survey responses being higher than the actual return rate 
because the respondent wants to seem positive to others. 
Score: “When using the social desirability bias as a factor, people will choose an option that is more  
in tune with societal norms. The percentage of people saying they would return the wallets will be 
higher than actually returned in the experiment.” 
Score: “In this survey, more people would respond ‘yes’ to the wallet question because in our society 
the socially acceptable thing to do is to return the wallet.” 
Score: “If the survey was conducted where keeping the wallet was valued more than returning it,  
the social desirability effect may encourage more people to say ‘no’ in order to fit in with a tough crowd 
that they are trying to impress.” 
Note: Student responses could indicate the survey response rates as lower or the same as long as it  
is adequately justified in a way that is consistent with social desirability.  
Do NOT score references to the experiment using the lost wallet procedure alone.  
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
 
© 2019 The College Board.  
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 
Question 2 
Purvik and Nisha spent a summer day at a popular amusement park with friends. They rode roller coasters,  
ate cotton candy, and played carnival games to win prizes. Explain how each of the following might have 
played a role in their day. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Amygdala 
Approach-approach conflict 
Arousal theory 
Informational social influence 
Motion parallax 
Taste aversion 
Vestibular sense 
General Considerations 
1. Answers should be presented in sentences and must be cogent enough for the meaning of the response 
to come through. Spelling and grammatical mistakes do not reduce the score of a response, but spelling 
must be close enough that the reader is convinced of the word. 
2. Do not score any notes made on the question section of the booklet. Score only what has been written 
in the blanks provided in the booklet. 
3. Definitions alone will not score, but they may be used to enhance the application. 
4. Within a point, a student will not be penalized for misinformation unless it directly contradicts 
correct information that would otherwise have scored a point. A correct application with an incorrect 
definition is not considered a direct contradiction and should score the point. 
5. Rubric examples provided for each point are not to be considered exhaustive. 
6. Responses that simply parrot or repeat the terms from the question will not score. 
7. A response can score a point only if it clearly conveys what part of the question is being answered.  
It is possible to infer what part of the question is being answered if it is consistent with the order  
of the question. 
Point 1: Amygdala 
Response must indicate a specific emotion related to, or synonymous with, fear or aggression. 
• 
• 
• 
Score: “The amygdala could have played a role in their day when Nisha was afraid  
to go on roller coasters.” 
Score: “Purvik and Nisha attempted to win a prize from the carnival game, but when they failed  
their amygdala initiated feelings of anger.” 
Do Not Score: “Their amygdalas could have been used when they were happy to eat because  
the amygdala controls emotion.” 
Point 2: Approach-approach Conflict 
Response must indicate a conflict between two possibilities that are both seen as positive.  
• 
• 
• 
Score: “Purvik only has time for one more roller coaster so he must decide between riding  
his favorite roller coaster or the new roller coaster he was excited to ride.” 
Score: “Purvik and Nisha must make a decision whether to eat yummy cotton candy  
or delicious ice cream.” 
Note: Assume that choices are positive unless there is a clear indication that one of the options  
is bad/negative. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
• 
 
 
 
• 
• 
 
 
 
• 
• 
 
 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 2 (continued) 
Point 3: Arousal Theory 
Response must indicate that Purvik or Nisha is motivated to do something in order to reach their preferred  
or optimal level of arousal, or their physiological state impacts performance.  
Pathways to score may include any of the following: 
Motivation Impacts Arousal 
Level of Arousal Impacts Performance 
People are motivated to engage in a g
 iven 
behavior to raise or lower their arousal levels. 
Moderate level of arousal leads to the highest 
level of performance. 
Low levels of arousal would lead to the best 
performance on new or complex tasks. 
High levels of arousal would lead to better 
performance on easier or well-rehearsed tasks.  
Score: “Purvik goes on roller coasters to get an 
adrenaline rush.” 
Score: “Nisha would perform better at a new 
carnival game if she was not was too calm but 
not too nervous.” 
Point 4: Informational Social Influence 
Response must indicate a change in attitude or behavior because a person accepts someone else`s 
rationale/justification. Response must go beyond just fitting in or doing something because others are doing 
it. This is in order to differentiate from normative social influence. 
Score: “If someone came up to Nisha and told her a specific ride was unsafe, Nisha wouldn`t want to go  
on the ride because she would assume the stranger is correct about the ride.” 
Score: “If Nisha and Purvik are trying to choose which line to join to enter a ride, they follow the season 
tickets holders, assuming they know the best way to navigate the park.” 
Point 5: Motion Parallax 
Response must indicate that individuals perceive close objects moving faster or in the opposite direction,  
or distant objects moving slowly or in the same direction. 
Score: “Motion parallax would have helped them perceive depth while riding the roller coaster  
as distant objects would have moved by more slowly.” 
Score: “As Purvik and Nisha are riding roller coasters, objects that are closer (the safety fence)  
to them will appear to move faster across their field of vision than objects that are further in the 
distance (cars in the parking lot).” 
Point 6: Taste Aversion 
Response must indicate that the person associates ingesting a certain food with feeling ill/sick,  
and subsequently they are likely to have a negative response or avoid the food in the future. 
Score: “If Purvik or Nisha eats something that makes them sick that day, they will avoid that thing  
in the future.” 
Score: “If Purvik or Nisha eats something that has made them sick in the past, such as a hot dog,  
they are likely to avoid it at the amusement park.” 
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
• 
• 
• 
AP® PSYCHOLOGY 
2019 SCORING GUIDELINES 
Question 2 (continued) 
Point 7: Vestibular Sense 
Response must include maintaining balance, coordination, equilibrium, or feeling dizzy and disorientated.  
Score: “Purvik rides a roller coaster and then feels dizzy.” 
Score: “Typically, we use our semicircular canals for our sense of balance and orientation, when 
flipped upside down on a roller coaster, we rely on our vestibular sense to t ell us that our feet should 
not be above our head.“ 
Do Not Score: “Kinesthetic sense”. 
© 2019 The College Board. 
Visit the College Board on the web: collegeboard.org. 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2019 AP Psychology Scoring Worksheet 
Section I: Multiple Choice 
Number Correct (
out of one hundr
ed) times one point zero z
e
ro zero zero 
equals Weighted Section I Score (Do not round)
Section II: Free Response 
Question 1 Blank
 (out of seven)
 times thre
e point five seven one four equals Blank (do not round)
Question 2 B
lank (out of sev
en) times t
hree point five seven one four equals Blank (do not round)
Sum equa
ls Weighte
d Section I
I Scor
e (Do not round)
Composite Score 
Weigh
ted S
ection I 
Score plu
s Weighted Section
 II Score equals
 Composite Score 
(Round to nearest wh
ole number)
AP Score Conversion Chart 
Psychology 
Composite 
Score Range 
AP Score 
110-150
5 
91-109
4 
77-90
3 
65-76
2 
0-64
1 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2019 AP Psychology 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Multiple-Choice Questions 
Question 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
Key 
% Correct 
1 
1.B 
6.H: Explain the maturation of cognitive abilities 
(Piaget's stages, Information process). 
Cognitive Development in 
Childhood 
D 
59 
2 
1.A 
5.L: Define intelligence and list characteristics  
of how psychologists measure intelligence. 
Introduction to Intelligence 
E 
54 
3 
1.A 
7.J: Identify the contributions of major 
researchers in personality theory. 
Introduction to Personality 
C 
36 
4 
1.C 
7.E: Discuss the biological underpinnings  
of motivation, including needs, drives,  
and homeostasis. 
Specific Topics in Motivation 
D 
63 
5 
1.B 
5.G: Describe strategies for memory 
improvement and typical memory errors. 
Forgetting and Memory 
Distortion 
C 
77 
6 
1.B 
8.I: Discuss the major diagnostic categories, 
including feeding and eating disorders, 
personality disorders, and their corresponding 
symptoms. 
Feeding and Eating, 
Substance and Addictive,  
and Personality Disorders 
B 
89 
7 
1.C 
7.B: Compare and contrast motivational 
theories, including the strengths and 
weaknesses of each. 
Theories of Motivation 
C 
83 
8 
1.B 
9.C: Anticipate the impact of self-fulfilling 
prophecy on behavior. 
Attribution Theory and 
Person Perception 
C 
69 
9 
1.C 
1.C: Describe and compare different theoretical 
approaches in explaining behavior. 
Introducing Psychology 
E 
76 
10 
1.B 
4.I: Predict how practice, schedules of 
reinforcement, other aspects of reinforcement, 
and motivation will influence quality of learning. 
Operant Conditioning 
D 
52 
11 
1.B 
8.L: Describe major treatment orientations used 
in therapy and how those orientations influence 
therapeutic planning. 
Psychological Perspectives 
and Treatment of Disorders 
C 
81 
12 
1.B 
5.F: Describe strategies for retrieving memories. 
Retrieving 
D 
70 
13 
1.B 
9.K: Describe the variables that contribute  
to altruism and aggression. 
Altruism and Aggression 
D 
39 
14 
1.B 
2.I: Describe the nervous system and its 
subdivisions and functions in the brain. 
The Brain 
D 
73 
15 
1.B 
9.I: Predict the impact of the presence of others 
on individual behavior. 
Group Influences on Behavior 
and Mental Processes 
E 
88 
16 
1.B 
3.I: Describe the hearing process, including the 
specific nature of energy transduction, relevant 
anatomical structures, and specialized pathways 
in the brain for each of the senses. 
Auditory Sensation  
and Perception 
E 
19 
17 
1.A 
5.K: Identify problem-solving strategies as well 
as factors that create bias and errors in thinking. 
Biases and Errors in Thinking 
B 
87 
18 
1.B 
5.P: Explain how psychologists design tests, 
including standardization strategies and other 
techniques to establish reliability and validity. 
Psychometric Principles  
and Intelligence Testing 
C 
69 
19 
1.B 
8.F: Discuss the major diagnostic categories, 
including neurodevelopmental disorders, 
neurocognitive disorders, schizophrenia 
spectrum, and other psychotic disorders,  
and their corresponding symptoms. 
Neurodevelopmental and 
Schizophrenic Disorders 
E 
94 
20 
1.B 
8.P: Summarize effectiveness of specific 
treatments used to address specific problems 
from a biological perspective. 
Treatment of Disorders from 
the Biological Perspective 
D 
81 
21 
1.C 
6.E: Identify the contributions of major 
researchers in developmental psychology in  
the area of social development in childhood. 
Social Development in 
Childhood 
B 
74 
22 
1.B 
3.K: Describe sensory processes, including the 
specific nature of energy transduction, relevant 
anatomical structures, and specialized pathways 
in the brain for each of the body senses. 
Body Senses 
C 
79 
23 
1.B 
2.S: Discuss aspects of sleep and dreaming. 
Sleep and Dreaming 
A 
54 
24 
1.B 
4.F: Describe basic classical conditioning 
phenomena. 
Classical Conditioning 
A 
68 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2019 AP Psychology 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Question 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
Key 
% Correct 
25 
1.C 
8.P: Summarize effectiveness of specific 
treatments used to address specific problems 
from a biological perspective. 
Treatment of Disorders from 
the Biological Perspective 
B 
92 
26 
1.A 
6.L: Predict the physical and cognitive changes 
that emerge through the lifespan, including 
steps that can be taken to maximize function. 
Adulthood and Aging 
D 
61 
27 
1.B 
9.A: Apply attribution theory to explain motives. 
Attribution Theory  
and Person Perception 
B 
85 
28 
2 
5.K: Identify problem-solving strategies as well 
as factors that create bias and errors in thinking. 
Biases and Errors in Thinking 
D 
56 
29 
1.B 
5.D: Outline the principles that underlie 
construction and encoding of memories. 
Encoding 
B 
72 
30 
1.A 
7.P: Identify frequently used assessment 
strategies, and evaluate relative test quality 
based on reliability and validity of the 
instruments. 
Measuring Personality 
D 
49 
31 
2 
8.L: Describe major treatment orientations used 
in therapy and how those orientations influence 
therapeutic planning. 
Psychological Perspectives 
and Treatment of Disorders 
B 
78 
32 
1.A 
5.P: Explain how psychologists design tests, 
including standardization strategies and other 
techniques to establish reliability and validity. 
Psychometric Principles  
and Intelligence Testing 
B 
73 
33 
1.A 
5.M: Discuss how culture influences  
the definition of intelligence. 
Introduction to Intelligence 
A 
75 
34 
1.A 
5.O: Identify the contributions of key 
researchers in intelligence research and testing. 
Introduction to Intelligence 
A 
39 
35 
1.A 
5.C: Identify the contributions of key researchers 
in cognitive psychology. 
Introduction to Memory 
C 
37 
36 
1.A 
2.G: Identify basic process of transmission  
of a signal between neurons. 
Neural Firing 
D 
74 
37 
1.B 
2.M: Discuss the role of neuroplasticity in 
traumatic brain injury. 
The Adaptable Brain 
E 
79 
38 
3 
1.F: Differentiate types of research with regard 
to purpose, strengths, and weaknesses. 
Research Methods  
in Psychology 
A 
78 
39 
1.B 
6.H: Explain the maturation of cognitive abilities 
(Piaget's stages, Information process). 
Cognitive Development  
in Childhood 
C 
65 
40 
1.B 
6.H: Explain the maturation of cognitive abilities 
(Piaget's stages, Information process). 
Cognitive Development  
in Childhood 
A 
71 
41 
1.C 
7.L: Compare and contrast the behaviorist  
and social cognitive theories of personality  
with other theories of personality. 
Behaviorism and Social 
Cognitive Theories  
of Personality 
D 
68 
42 
1.A 
1.I: Describe how research design drives the 
reasonable conclusions that can be drawn. 
Defining Psychological 
Science - The Experimental 
Method 
A 
79 
43 
1.A 
9.E: Discuss attitude formation and change, 
including persuasion strategies and cognitive 
dissonance. 
Attitude Formation  
and Attitude Change 
E 
48 
44 
3 
1.I: Describe how research design drives the 
reasonable conclusions that can be drawn. 
Defining Psychological 
Science - The Experimental 
Method 
E 
88 
45 
1.C 
7.H: Discuss theories of stress and the effects 
of stress on psychological and physical  
well-being. 
Stress and Coping 
C 
83 
46 
1.C 
8.L: Describe major treatment orientations used 
in therapy and how those orientations influence 
therapeutic planning. 
Psychological Perspectives 
and Treatment of Disorders 
B 
43 
47 
1.C 
7.A: Identify and apply basic motivational 
concepts to understand the behavior of humans 
and other animals. 
Theories of Motivation 
C 
69 
48 
1.B 
5.B: Describe and differentiate psychological  
and physiological systems of memory. 
Introduction to Memory 
A 
78 
49 
1.A 
8.L: Describe major treatment orientations used 
in therapy and how those orientations influence 
therapeutic planning. 
Psychological Perspectives 
and Treatment of Disorders 
D 
47 
50 
1.B 
6.H: Explain the maturation of cognitive abilities 
(Piaget's stages, Information process). 
Cognitive Development  
in Childhood 
C 
64 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2019 AP Psychology 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Question 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
Key 
% Correct 
51 
1.A 
2.G: Identify basic process of transmission  
of a signal between neurons. 
Neural Firing 
A 
50 
52 
1.A 
2.E: Describe the nervous system  
and its subdivisions and functions. 
Overview of the Nervous 
System and the Neuron 
C 
48 
53 
1.A 
5.E: Outline the principles that underlie effective 
storage of memories. 
Storing 
E 
31 
54 
1.A 
5.L: Define intelligence and list characteristics  
of how psychologists measure intelligence. 
Introduction to Intelligence 
A 
43 
55 
1.A 
5.O: Identify the contributions of key 
researchers in intelligence research and testing. 
Introduction to Intelligence 
C 
31 
56 
1.B 
4.F: Describe basic classical conditioning 
phenomena. 
Classical Conditioning 
D 
83 
57 
1.B 
2.S: Discuss aspects of sleep and dreaming. 
Sleep and Dreaming 
A 
88 
58 
3 
1.F: Differentiate types of research with regard 
to purpose, strengths, and weaknesses. 
Research Methods  
in Psychology 
C 
68 
59 
1.C 
7.M: Compare and contrast humanistic theories 
of personality with other theories of personality. 
Humanistic Theories  
of Personality 
D 
73 
60 
1.A 
3.F: Describe the vision process, including the 
specific nature of energy transduction, relevant 
anatomical structures, and specialized pathways 
in the brain for each of the senses. 
Visual Anatomy 
A 
71 
61 
1.B 
8.G: Discuss the major diagnostic categories, 
including anxiety disorders, bipolar  
and related disorders, depressive disorders, 
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders,  
and their corresponding symptoms. 
Bipolar, Depressive, Anxiety, 
and Obsessive-Compulsive 
and Related Disorders 
D 
96 
62 
2 
1.L: Apply basic descriptive statistical concepts, 
including interpreting and constructing graphs 
and calculating simple descriptive statistics. 
Statistical Analysis  
in Psychology 
B 
84 
63 
2 
1.L: Apply basic descriptive statistical concepts, 
including interpreting and constructing graphs 
and calculating simple descriptive statistics. 
Statistical Analysis  
in Psychology 
C 
90 
64 
2 
1.L: Apply basic descriptive statistical concepts, 
including interpreting and constructing graphs 
and calculating simple descriptive statistics. 
Statistical Analysis  
in Psychology 
B 
72 
65 
3 
1.F: Differentiate types of research with regard 
to purpose, strengths, and weaknesses. 
Research Methods  
in Psychology 
C 
61 
66 
1.A 
2.I: Describe the nervous system and its 
subdivisions and functions in the brain. 
The Brain 
B 
52 
67 
1.B 
2.J: Identify the contributions of key researchers 
to the study of the brain. 
The Brain 
D 
78 
68 
1.B 
5.D: Outline the principles that underlie 
construction and encoding of memories. 
Encoding 
A 
88 
69 
1.A 
4.F: Describe basic classical conditioning 
phenomena. 
Classical Conditioning 
C 
65 
70 
1.A 
4.H: Predict the effects of operant conditioning. 
Operant Conditioning 
B 
59 
71 
1.A 
2.E: Describe the nervous system  
and its subdivisions and functions. 
Overview of the Nervous 
System and the Neuron 
E 
60 
72 
1.A 
1.E: Distinguish the different domains  
of psychology. 
Introducing Psychology 
B 
38 
73 
1.B 
8.G: Discuss the major diagnostic categories, 
including anxiety disorders, bipolar  
and related disorders, depressive disorders, 
obsessive-compulsive and related disorders,  
and their corresponding symptoms. 
Bipolar, Depressive, Anxiety, 
and Obsessive-Compulsive 
and Related Disorders 
C 
83 
74 
1.B 
3.B: Discuss basic principles of sensory 
transduction, including absolute threshold, 
difference threshold, signal detection, and 
sensory adaptation. 
Principles of Sensation 
B 
64 
75 
1.B 
5.B: Describe and differentiate psychological  
and physiological systems of memory. 
Introduction to Memory 
E 
63 
76 
1.B 
4.H: Predict the effects of operant conditioning. 
Operant Conditioning 
A 
69 
77 
1.B 
3.D: Discuss how experience and culture can 
influence perceptual processes. 
Principles of Perception 
A 
50 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2019 AP Psychology 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Question 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
Key 
% Correct 
78 
1.A 
6.C: Discuss maturation of motor skills. 
The Lifespan and Physical 
Development in Childhood 
B 
87 
79 
1.B 
6.H: Explain the maturation of cognitive abilities 
(Piaget's stages, Information process). 
Cognitive Development  
in Childhood 
D 
44 
80 
3 
1.I: Describe how research design drives the 
reasonable conclusions that can be drawn. 
Defining Psychological 
Science - The Experimental 
Method 
C 
77 
81 
1.A 
9.F: Identify the contributions of key researchers 
in the areas of conformity, compliance,  
and obedience. 
Conformity, Compliance,  
and Obedience 
B 
95 
82 
1.B 
8.I: Discuss the major diagnostic categories, 
including feeding and eating disorders, 
personality disorders, and their corresponding 
symptoms. 
Feeding and Eating, 
Substance and Addictive,  
and Personality Disorders 
C 
78 
83 
2 
7.B: Compare and contrast motivational 
theories, including the strengths  
and weaknesses of each. 
Theories of Motivation 
E 
82 
84 
1.B 
7.A: Identify and apply basic motivational 
concepts to understand the behavior of humans 
and other animals. 
Theories of Motivation 
D 
81 
85 
1.A 
9.F: Identify the contributions of key researchers 
in the areas of conformity, compliance,  
and obedience. 
Conformity, Compliance,  
and Obedience 
E 
80 
86 
1.B 
5.I: Identify problem-solving strategies as well as 
factors that influence their effectiveness. 
Introduction to Thinking and 
Problem Solving 
C 
69 
87 
1.A 
3.F: Describe the vision process, including the 
specific nature of energy transduction, relevant 
anatomical structures, and specialized pathways 
in the brain for each of the senses. 
Visual Anatomy 
E 
57 
88 
3 
1.H: Identify independent, dependent, 
confounding, and control variables in 
experimental designs. 
Defining Psychological 
Science - The Experimental 
Method 
E 
90 
89 
1.C 
5.N: Compare and contrast historic and 
contemporary theories of intelligence. 
Introduction to Intelligence 
A 
87 
90 
1.A 
8.H: Discuss the major diagnostic categories, 
including dissociative disorders, somatic 
symptom and related disorders, and trauma- and 
stressor-related disorders and their 
corresponding symptoms. 
Trauma- and Stressor-
Related, Dissociative, and 
Somatic Sympton and 
Related Disorders 
A 
49 
91 
1.B 
5.K: Identify problem-solving strategies as well 
as factors that create bias and errors in thinking. 
Biases and Errors in Thinking 
E 
70 
92 
1.A 
8.L: Describe major treatment orientations used 
in therapy and how those orientations influence 
therapeutic planning. 
Psychological Perspectives 
and Treatment of Disorders 
A 
75 
93 
1.B 
9.A: Apply attribution theory to explain motives. 
Attribution Theory and 
Person Perception 
B 
63 
94 
1.A 
2.O: Describe various states of consciousness 
and their impact on behavior. 
The Adaptable Brain 
C 
55 
95 
1.B 
3.F: Describe the vision process, including the 
specific nature of energy transduction, relevant 
anatomical structures, and specialized pathways 
in the brain for each of the senses. 
Visual Anatomy 
E 
56 
96 
1.B 
7.B: Compare and contrast motivational 
theories, including the strengths and 
weaknesses of each. 
Theories of Motivation 
A 
43 
97 
2 
1.L: Apply basic descriptive statistical concepts, 
including interpreting and constructing graphs 
and calculating simple descriptive statistics. 
Statistical Analysis in 
Psychology 
A 
92 
98 
2 
7.O: Compare and contrast trait theories of 
personality with other theories of personality. 
Trait Theories of Personality 
A 
76 
99 
1.A 
7.N: Speculate how cultural context can facilitate 
or constrain personality development, especially 
as it relates to self-concept. 
Humanistic Theories of 
Personality 
C 
68 
100 
1.A 
8.P: Summarize effectiveness of specific 
treatments used to address specific problems 
from a biological perspective. 
Treatment of Disorders from 
the Biological Perspective 
B 
38 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2019 AP Psychology 
Question Descriptors and Performance Data  
 
Free-Response Questions 
Question 
Skill 
Learning Target 
Topic 
Mean Score 
1 
3|1.B 
1.H|7.B|7.N|9.I|1.F 
1.3|7.1|7.8|9.4|1.2 
3.45 
2 
1.B|1.C 
2.I|7.H|7.B|9.G|3.F|4.D|3.K 
2.6|7.4|7.1|9.3|3.3|4.1|3.7 
2.95 
