2025
AP
® Psychology
Free-Response Questions
Set 1
© 2025 College Board. College Board, Advanced Placement, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks 
of College Board. Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
AP Central is the official online home for the AP Program: apcentral.collegeboard.org.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
2
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
PSYCHOLOGY
SECTION II
TIME – 1 HOUR AND 10 MINUTES
Directions: 
Section II has 2 questions and lasts 1 hour and 10 minutes. 
You may pace yourself as you answer the questions in this section, or you may use these optional 
timing recommendations: 
It is suggested that you spend about 25 minutes on the Article Analysis Question (AAQ), using the 
first 10 minutes to read the provided source and the remaining time to write your response. 
It is suggested that you spend about 45 minutes on the Evidence-Based Question (EBQ), using the 
first 15 minutes to read the sources and the remaining time to write your response. 
You may use scratch paper for notes and planning, but credit will only be given for responses 
entered in this application. Text you enter as an annotation will not be included as part of your 
answer. You can go back and forth between questions in this section until time expires. The clock 
will turn red when 5 minutes remain—the proctor will not give you any time updates or 
warnings.
Note: This exam was originally administered digitally. It is presented here in a format optimized for 
teacher and student use in the classroom.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
3
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
Using the source provided, respond to all parts of the question. 
1.	Your response to the question should be provided in six parts: A, B, C, D, E, and F. Write the 
response to each part of the question in complete sentences. Use appropriate psychological 
terminology in your response.
A.	Identify the research method used in the study.
B.	State the operational definition of high misinformation in the study.
C.	Describe what the mean indicates for the percentage of correct responses between the high 
misinformation group and the low misinformation group.
D.	Identify at least one ethical guideline applied by the researchers.
E.	 Explain the extent to which the research findings may or may not be generalizable using 
specific and relevant evidence from the study.
F.	 Explain how at least one of the research findings supports or refutes the misinformation 
effect.
Introduction
This research study explores the effect of being presented with varying amounts of 
misinformation about a specific event on the memory of that event.
Participants
A total of 127 students at a large university were recruited through the university’s research 
participation system. They participated in the study in exchange for course credit. The final 
sample of participants was 69% women and 31% men. The race/ethnicity of the participants was 
reported as follows: 65% Hispanic/Latino/a, 15% Black/African American, 11% White/European 
American, 4% Asian/Asian American, and 5% Other.1 The participants ranged in age from 18 to 
39 years old (mean age = 21.21, standard deviation = 3.28).
Method
After providing consent, participants viewed a 6.5-minute silent video of a mock crime. The 
video depicted an electrician entering a house to fix items such as an oven and a light fixture. 
While he was in the house, he stole some of the owners’ possessions. After watching the video, 
participants completed a 12-minute trivia questionnaire as a distractor task.2 Participants 
completed all portions of the study online.
Participants were then told that eight previous participants had written brief summaries 
of the robbery shown in the video. They were also told that one of those summaries would 
be presented to them, along with a profile of the previous participant, to refresh their 
memory. Unknown to the participants, these “previous participants” were not real people. 
The researchers created the previous participants’ profiles based on the demographics of the 
population of students on the university campus. The goal was to create believable profiles so 
that the summaries would be more credible to the participants.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
4
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions to receive a summary with a 
specific amount of misinformation:
•	
Low misinformation condition: 8 of 40 sentences (20% misleading information)
•	
Medium misinformation condition: 20 of 40 sentences (50% misleading information)
•	
High misinformation condition: 32 of 40 sentences (80% misleading information)
The misleading information changed details about items seen in the video. No information was 
added. The non-misleading sentences were neutral to avoid strengthening the participant’s 
memory of the target items. For example, a misleading item description was, “He noticed 
the dresser was covered with a brown cloth.” In reality, the cloth was navy blue. The neutral 
description of that item was, “He noticed the dresser was covered with a cloth.”
After reading an entire previous participant’s summary, each current participant completed 
a 5-minute math test as a distractor task. Then, all participants were asked an identical set of 
40 multiple-choice questions in random order about the mock crime video. Each question had 
three answer options:
1.	 Correct: the correct option corresponding to what was shown in the video (e.g., a navy 
blue cloth);
2.	 Misled: an incorrect answer that reflected misinformation provided in the summaries 
(e.g., a brown cloth); and
3.	 Incorrect: an incorrect answer containing information that was not portrayed in the 
video or any summary (e.g., a yellow cloth).
Participants then completed a questionnaire asking about the credibility of the previous 
participant’s summary (e.g., “How good was the quality of the summary?” and “How familiar 
with the video was the participant who wrote this summary?”).
Results and Discussion
The researchers analyzed the results of the questionnaire by comparing participants’ correct 
responses with how participants viewed the credibility of the previous participant’s summary. 
The researchers hypothesized that if participants distrusted the summary, they would be less 
likely to incorporate the information into their memory of the event, leading to their being less 
likely to choose an incorrect answer. The results are shown in the table.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
5
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
Mean Percentages of Correct, Misled, and Incorrect Responses for Each Misinformation 
Condition
Response
Type
Misinformation Condition
High Misinformation
Group
Medium
Misinformation Group
Low misinformation
Group
Correct
63%
66%
74%
Misled
30%
27%
19%
Incorrect
7%
7%
7%
The researchers found that within each condition, participants performed best if they 
distrusted the accuracy of the summary. Participants who were presented with higher levels 
of misinformation were more likely to report being distrustful, and those who reported being 
distrustful of the summary resisted more misinformation than those who did not.
Pena, M. M., Klemfuss, J. Z., Loftus, E. F., & Mindthoff, A. (2017). The effects of exposure to different amounts of 
misinformation and source credibility perception on source monitoring and memory accuracy. Psychology of 
Consciousness: Theory, Research, and Practice, 4(4), 337-347.
1: Language referencing racial, ethnic, or gender identities may be outdated or fail to reflect the complexities 
of identity that participants represent. Race/ethnicity categories reflect those reported in the original research 
article.
2: a task that is unrelated to the primary task that participants are asked to complete before they are asked to 
recall the target information.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
6
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
This question has three parts: Part A, Part B, and Part C. Use the three sources provided to 
answer all parts of the question.
For Part B and Part C, you must cite the source that you used to answer the question. You can do 
this in two different ways:
•	
Parenthetical Citation:
For example: “...(Source 1).”
•	
Embedded Citation:
For example: “According to Source 1...”
Write the response to each part of the question in complete sentences. Use appropriate 
psychological terminology.
2.	Using the sources provided, develop and justify an argument about whether the presence of 
others improves performance.
A.	Propose a specific and defensible claim based in psychological science that responds to the 
question.
B.	
i.	Support your claim using at least one piece of specific and relevant evidence from one of 
the sources.
ii.	Explain how the evidence from Part B (i) supports your claim using a psychological 
perspective, theory, concept, or research finding learned in AP Psychology.
C.	
i.	Support your claim using an additional piece of specific and relevant evidence from a 
different source than the one that was used in Part B (i).
ii.	Explain how the evidence from Part C (i) supports your claim using a different 
psychological perspective, theory, concept, or research finding learned in AP Psychology 
than the one that was used in Part B (ii).
Source 1
Introduction
In this study, researchers attempted to establish whether the presence of others leads people to 
perform better on a task than when they are doing the task alone.
Participants
Forty-five undergraduate students, all men, received course credit in an introductory 
psychology course for their participation. Researchers did not report race/ethnicity data for the 
participants.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
7
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
Method
As each participant arrived, he was told the following: “In this experiment, you will be part of 
a group that will perform a task together. It is important that the members of the group have 
a uniform appearance. To make you as alike as possible, I’d like you to take off your shoes, put 
these socks over your own socks, and then put on these shoes. They might be a little large, but 
we need to have a size that fits everyone. Also, put on this lab coat—it ties in the back—over 
your own clothes.”
Each participant was then given a pair of large athletic socks, a pair of size 12 athletic shoes, 
and a large, long lab coat. Each participant was led by the researcher to a large waiting room 
containing tables, chairs, reading material, and some broken equipment.
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of three conditions: alone, audience, or 
incidental audience.
1.	 Alone condition: The participant was left in the waiting room alone to put on the 
clothing.
2.	 Audience condition: A confederate of the researcher was already seated in the waiting 
room as the participant arrived. The confederate sat attentively in the corner and 
watched the participant put on the clothing.
3.	 Incidental audience condition: A confederate of the researcher sat in a corner of the 
waiting room facing away from the participant, repairing a broken piece of equipment 
while the participant put on the clothing.
For all three conditions, the participant was observed by a hidden research assistant who 
watched him through a narrow opening in the drapes that covered a one-way mirror. The 
hidden assistant timed the participant as he completed each of the following activities:
1.	 Taking off his own shoes
2.	 Putting on the socks given to him
3.	 Putting on the shoes given to him
4.	 Putting on the lab coat given to him and tying it in the back
After the participant completed the four tasks, any confederate present left the room, and 
the participant was left sitting alone. At the end of 10 minutes, the researcher came back into 
the room. The researcher explained that the other participants had not shown up and that 
the researcher had called off the experiment because the researchers needed three people to 
continue.
When the researcher left the room, the participant was again timed by the hidden research 
assistant while he completed the following actions:
1.	 Taking off the lab coat
2.	 Taking off the shoes given to him
3.	 Taking off the socks given to him
4.	 Putting on his own shoes


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
8
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
Researchers categorized taking off and putting on their own shoes as simple and well-learned 
tasks. They categorized putting on and taking off the socks, shoes, and lab coat as difficult and 
new tasks.
Results and Discussion
Researchers found that performance on the well-learned tasks was faster in the presence 
of an audience. Performance on well-learned tasks improved both when participants were 
directly observed (audience condition) and when the confederate was present in the room 
but distracted (incidental audience condition). When an audience was present, it took the 
participants longer to complete the new, more difficult tasks. The findings are summarized in 
the graph.
Audience Condition and Completion Time of Task
For the simple and well-learned tasks, researchers found a statistically significant difference in 
the amount of time participants took to complete the tasks alone compared with the amount of 
time it took with an attentive audience.
For the new and difficult tasks, researchers found a statistically significant difference when 
comparing the amount of time participants took when alone with the amount of time they took 
when they were in the audience condition or incidental audience condition.
They found no significant difference between the alone condition and the incidental audience 
condition for either type of task.
Markus, H. (1978). The effect of mere presence on social facilitation: An unobtrusive test. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 14(4), 389–397.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
9
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
Source 2
Introduction
In this study, researchers explored how the presence of others influenced the ability of baboons 
to complete an operant conditioning task.
Participants
The study was conducted on 11 baboons (7 male and 4 female; mean age = 5.72 years; standard 
deviation of age = 1.71; age range = 3–9 years).
Method
The baboons had access in their enclosure to computers with touch screens, preprogrammed 
with operant conditioning tasks. When the baboons touched a screen, it triggered the 
immediate display of a white cross and either a red circle or a blue square. To obtain a food 
reward, the baboon had to touch the white cross only when the red circle was present. During 
the non-conflict trials, the white cross was always presented on the left side of the response 
screen and the red circle or blue square on the right. Incorrect responses produced a three-
second time-out.
Figure 1: The Non-Conflict Trial
Baboons performed the task until they correctly demonstrated the rewarded behavior three 
times in a row.
Once the baboons were trained, researchers increased the difficulty of the task. In 80% of these 
trials, the baboons were given the setup they were already familiar with, in which the cross 
was on the left and the circle or square was on the right. But in 20% of the trials, the baboons 
were presented with an opposite, or a conflicting, setup in which the cross was on the right and 
the circle or square was on the left. Researchers measured the baboons’ response times when 
presented with the conflicting task versus the nonconflicting task.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
10
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
Figure 2: The Non-Conflict and the Conflict Trial
During these trials, the baboons were randomly assigned to be either alone or in the presence 
of other baboons performing the same task. For baboons performing the task in the presence 
of others, they could see other baboons using a computer, but the design of the test chamber 
prevented any of the baboons from seeing the touch screens of the other baboons. As a result, 
the baboons could not see the other baboons’ responses to the tests.
Results and Discussion
For the baboons who were in the presence of others during the conflicting trials task, their 
response time was delayed when compared to baboons who were alone. The researchers found 
that the delayed reaction time was greatest for male baboons in the presence of older males 
with a higher social rank.
Huguet, P., Barbet, I., Belletier, C., Monteil, J-M., Fagot, J. (2014). Cognitive control under social influence in baboons. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 143(6). 2067-2073.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
11
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
Source 3
Introduction
Vigilance is the ability to maintain attention for prolonged periods while still being on the 
lookout for relevant signals in the environment. Vigilance performance involves participants 
responding to infrequent signals over time. In this study, researchers examined the effect of 
observers on people’s vigilance performance.
Participants
Data were collected from 132 participants (98 women; 34 men).1 All participants were 
undergraduate students recruited through the research participation system at a large 
university in the southeastern United States. All participation was voluntary, and participants 
received course credit for completing the study. The average age of participants was 18.83 years 
(standard deviation = 2.23 years; range = 18–39 years). Researchers did not report race/ethnicity 
data for the participants.
Method
For 24 minutes, participants monitored a computer screen displaying repeated presentations 
of two numbers. They were instructed to press the space bar when they saw two numbers that 
differed from one another by zero or +/- 1 when subtracted. For example, participants were to 
hit the space bar when presented with the numbers 43 (4 - 3 = 1) or 77 (7 - 7 = 0), but not when 
presented with 73 (7 - 3 = 4) or 39 (3 - 9 = -6).
Participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions:
1.	 Evaluative observer condition (29 women; 4 men): The participant completed the task 
with a research assistant present and seated behind them. The research assistant was 
instructed to sporadically take notes on a clipboard to create the appearance of actively 
evaluating the participant.
2.	 Merely present observer condition (20 women; 13 men): The participant completed the 
task in the presence of a research assistant who was seated at an adjacent desk, facing 
the opposite direction. The observer could not directly watch the participant and was 
engaged in a secondary task, like reading a book.
3.	 Electronic observer condition (25 women; 8 men): The participant completed the task 
in the presence of a webcam that was placed on top of the computer screen. A video 
recorder was also placed on a tripod in front of the participant. The participant was 
told that the research assistant used these devices to monitor their performance. These 
cameras were not actually recording while the participant completed the task, but the 
participant believed they were.
4.	 No observer present (control) condition (24 women; 9 men): The participant completed 
the entire task alone in the room. No social presence, electronic or otherwise, was used 
during this task.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org	
12
© 2025 College Board.
AP PSYCHOLOGY 2025 n FREE-RESPONSE QUESTIONS
Results and Discussion
Participants who completed the vigilance task alone detected significantly fewer correct 
number pairs than those who completed the task in the electronic observer condition or the 
evaluative observer condition. Interestingly, there was no significant difference in correct 
detections between those in the no observer present condition and those in the merely present 
observer condition.
The results suggest that when people feel they are being directly evaluated by either an 
inperson or electronic observer, they perform better on tasks that require vigilance.
Claypoole, V.L., Neigel, A.R., Waldfogle, G.E., & Szalma, J.L. (2019). Evaluative social presence can improve vigilance 
performance, but vigilance is still hard work and is stressful. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception 
and Performance, 45(5), 616-627.
1: Language referencing racial, ethnic, or gender identities may be outdated or fail to reflect the complexities of 
identity that participants represent.
STOP
END OF EXAM
