STATISTICS 
SECTION I 
Time- 1 hour and 30 minutes 
40 Questions 
 
Directions: Solve each of the following problems, using the available space for scratch 
work. Decide which is the best of the choices given and fill in the corresponding circle on 
the answer sheet. No credit will be given for anything written in the test book. Do not 
spend too much time on any one problem. 
1. A machine at a large factory fills bottles with juice. To reduce the likelihood of bottles 
containing less than 8 ounces (oz) of juice, the machine is set to fill the bottles with a 
mean of 8.050% of juice. To investigate whether the machine is working properly, the 
factory manager randomly samples ten bottles every 24 hours and records data for 
several variables from each of the sampled bottles. 
 
Which of the following is classified as a continuous quantitative variable for the 
factory manager's investigation? 
 
(A) Whether a randomly chosen bottle contains less than 8 oz of juice 
 
(B) Whether all of the bottles in the sample contain less than 8 oz of juice 
 
(C) The number of bottles that contain less than 8 oz of juice out of a random sample    
of 10 bottles of juice 
(D) The number of properly filled bottles of juice at a randomly selected time 
(E) The amount of juice, in ounces, in a randomly selected bottle 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. Chicken eggs are categorized into sizes based on weight. The table displays the sizes 
and associated weights, in grams (g), for chicken eggs sold in a certain country. 
Egg Size and Weight 
Size 
Small 
Medium 
Large 
Extra Large 
Weight 
Less than 53 
g 
53 g to less than 63 
g 
63 g to less than 73 
g 
73 g or 
more 
 
Weights of chicken eggs sold in the country are normally distributed with mean 𝜇= 62 g 
and standard deviation 𝜎= 6 g. 
Which of the following is closest to the probability that a randomly selected chicken egg 
sold in the country is either small or extra large? 
 
(A) 0.0334 
 
(B) 0.0668 
 
(C) 0.0980 
 
(D) 0.1002 
 
(E) 0.8998 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. The following boxplot summarizes the annual snowfall amounts, in inches, for a 
sample of 25 cities in the United States. 
 
 
Based on the boxplot, which of the following can be concluded? 
 
(A) The first quartile is about 20 inches. 
 
(B) The median is about 20 inches. 
 
(C) The third quartile is about 30 inches. 
 
(D) The interquartile range is about 20 inches. 
 
(E) The range is about 40 inches. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. According to a survey, 32 percent of people in a certain country regularly recycle.     
Mr. Giovanni, the mayor of a specific city in the country, wanted to know whether the 
residents in his city regularly recycle more than the national average. He selected a 
random sample of 50 residents, 28 of whom regularly recycle. Mr. Giovanni would like to 
use a one-sample 𝑧-test for a population proportion to test the hypotheses H0: 𝑝= 0.32 
versus Ha: 𝑝> 0.32, where 𝑝 is the proportion of city residents who regularly recycle. In 
order to use this test, the sampling distribution of the sample proportion needs to be 
approximately normal. 
 
Which of the following is true for Mr. Giovanni's study and ensures that the sampling 
distribution of the sample proportion is approximately normal? 
 
(A) The distribution of the population of all residents who regularly recycle is 
approximately normal. 
 
(B) The sample size is 50, which is larger than 30 . 
 
(C) The sample size of 50 is less than 10% of the residents in the city. 
 
(D) The expected number of residents who regularly recycle is 16, and the expected 
number of residents who do not regularly recycle is 34, and both numbers are at least 10. 
 
(E) The observed number of residents who regularly recycle is 28, and the observed 
number of residents who do not regularly recycle is 22, and both numbers are at least 10. 
 
 
 
5. A group of farmers wants to estimate the mean length of carrots grown on their farms. 
The farmers will select a random sample of carrots from the farms and will measure each 
carrot's length, in inches, and compute the mean and standard deviation of the sample. 
Assuming the conditions for inference are met, which of the following is the most 
appropriate method to use for such an estimate? 
 
(A) A one-sample 𝑡-interval for a population mean 
 
(B) A one-sample 𝑡-interval for a sample mean 
 
(C) A one-sample 𝑧-interval for a population mean 
 
(D). A one-sample 𝑧-interval for a population proportion 
 
(E) A one-sample 𝑧-interval for a sample proportion 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

6. Scores from a robotics competition have a mean of 19.9 points and a standard 
deviation of 7.2 points. Scores from an art competition have a mean of 20.2 points and a 
standard deviation of 5.7 points. Dominic enters the competitions and gets a score of 27 
in robotics and a score of 26 in art. 
 
Based on Dominic's standardized scores, in which competition did Dominic have a better 
performance? 
 
(A) Robotics, because Dominic's standardized score in robotics is approximately 0.99, 
while his standardized score in art is approximately 0.85. 
 
(B) Robotics, because Dominic's standardized score in robotics is approximately 1.19, 
while his standardized score in art is approximately 1.02. 
 
(C) Art, because Dominic's standardized score in art is approximately 1.19, while his 
standardized score in robotics is approximately 0.85. 
 
(D) Art, because Dominic's standardized score in art is approximately 1.02, while his 
standardized score in robotics is approximately 0.99. 
 
(E) Art, because Dominic's standardized score in art is approximately 0.99, while his 
standardized score in robotics is approximately 1.02. 
 
 
 
7. A professional sports league has 30 teams. A fan of one of the teams is interested in 
the mean yearly salary of players on that team. The fan obtains the yearly salary of each 
player for all 28 players on the team. 
 
Which of the following best describes the fan's sampling plan? 
 
(A) Simple random sample 
 
(B) Stratified random sample, with teams as strata 
 
(C) Cluster sample, with teams as clusters 
 
(D) Systematic random sample 
 
(E) Census 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

8. In an experiment, Jaden, a statistics student, wants to investigate whether listening to 
music while playing a game of chess results in a game with more total moves.  Jaden's 
large college has 200 students who play chess and are willing to participate in the 
experiment. He allows the players to decide whether they will play a chess game against 
a computer program while listening to music or will play a chess game against the same 
computer program while not listening to music. The total number of moves it takes for 
each chess game will be recorded. 
Which of the following statements best describes why this is not a well-designed 
experiment? 
 
(A) The subjects cannot be blind to the treatment because they will know whether they 
are listening to music. 
 
(B) The treatments were not randomly assigned. 
 
(C) There is not a control group of players who do not play chess but do listen to music. 
 
(D) There was no replication because each player plays only one game against the 
computer program. 
 
(E) The players were not randomly selected. 
 
 
 
9. In a certain game, a player wins a prize by randomly picking a red marble from a bag 
of differently colored marbles. The probability that a player will win a prize on a given 
play of the game is 0.26. 
Assuming successive plays of the game are independent, which of the following 
statements is true? 
 
(A) If a player plays this game a very large number of times, the player will win a prize 
about 26% of the time 
 
(B) If a player plays the game 100 times, the player will win a prize exactly 26 times. 
 
(C) If a player does not win a prize in 25 consecutive plays, the player is guaranteed to 
win a prize on the 26th play. 
 
(D) It is impossible for the player to win a prize on two consecutive plays of the game. 
 
(E) The player is guaranteed to win exactly one prize in 26 consecutive plays of the game. 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

10. A simple random sample of n=23 people who commute from home to work in a large 
metropolitan area is selected.  Each person is asked their distance in miles from home to 
work and how long it typically takes in minutes to commute from home to work. The 
distance, 𝑥, and typical commute time, 𝑦, are recorded for each person in the sample.  A 
least-squares regression model using distance to predict typical commute time results in 
the following computer output. 
 
Regression Output 
Predictor 
Coefficient 
SE of Coefficient 
𝑇 
𝑃-Value 
Constant 
5554 
1.805 
3.06 
0.0063 
Distance 
1216 
0.103 
11.86 
< 0.0001 
S=5.610 
𝑅2 = 0.875 
 
 
 
 
Assuming all conditions for inference are met which of the following is a 90 percent 
confidence interval in the predicted charge in typical commute time for a one-mile 
increase in the distance from home to work? 
 
(A) 1.216 ± 1.717 (
5.610
√23 ) 
 
(B) 1.216 ± 1.721 (
0.103
√23 ) 
 
 
(C) 1.216 ± 1.721(0.103) 
 
(D) 1.216 ± 2.074 (
5.610
√23 ) 
 
 
(E) 1.216 ± 2.069(0.103) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

11. Blue light is the wavelength of light given off by electronic devices and energy-
efficient lightbulbs.  Researchers are interested in investigating the effect of blue light on 
sleep. The researchers conduct a study using 30 volunteers. There are two light settings 
used in the study: one with a high amount of blue light and one with a low amount of 
blue light. Ench volunteer will spend the night in the researchers' sleep lab on two 
different nights. On one of the nights, each volunteer will be exposed to one of the two 
light settings for 50 minutes prior to their usual bedtime. On another night, each 
volunteer will be exposed to the other light setting for 50 minutes prior to their usual 
bedtime. The light setting that is experienced first is randomized for each volunteer, 
After each night in the sleep lab, the amount of melatonin, a hormone associated with 
the sleep-wake cycle, is measured for each volunteer. When measuring the results, the 
researchers know which light setting each volunteer was exposed to each night. 
 
Which experimental design or method are the researchers using for the study? 
 
(A) Double-blind experiment 
 
(B) Randomized complete block design, blocked by usual bedtime 
 
(C) Completely randomized design 
 
(D) Matched pairs design 
 
(E) This is an observational study, not an experiment. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

12. A researcher in a certain country claims that the proportion of people in their 
twenties (people aged 20 to 29) who can lift more than 200 pounds is greater than the 
proportion of people in their forties (people aged 40 to 49) who can lift more than 200 
pounds. In a random sample of people in their twenties living in that country, 31 percent 
could lift more than 200 pounds. In a separate random sample of people in their forties 
living in the country, 22 percent could lift more than 200 pounds. 
Let 𝑝1 be the proportion of all people in their twenties living in the country who can lift 
more than 200 pounds. 
Let 𝑝2 be the proportion of all people in their forties living in the country who can lift 
more than 200 pounds. 
Which of the following are the appropriate null and alternative hypotheses for testing the 
researcher's claim about these two age groups? 
 
(A) H0: 𝑝1 = 0.31 
       Ha: 𝑝1 < 0.31 
 
(B) H0: 𝑝1 = 0.22 
       Ha: 𝑝2 > 0.22 
 
(C) H0:𝑝2 = 0.22 
       Ha: 𝑝2 > 0.22 
 
(D) H0:𝑝1 = 𝑝2 
       Ha: 𝑝1 < 𝑝2 
 
(E) H0: 𝑝1 = 𝑝2 
       𝐻a:𝑝1 > 𝑝2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

13. Many cities are hiring artists to create asphalt art, in which artists paint murals 
directly on certain roads in hopes of getting people to slow down and follow the speed 
limit along those roads. During a 24 -hour period, a researcher measured the speeds of 
all drivers who drove on randomly selected roads. Some roads had art, and some roads 
did not have art. Each road had a speed limit of 35 miles per hour (mph). The 
distributions of speed for both types of roads are displayed in the following boxplots. 
Speed on Roads 
 
 
 
Based on the boxplots, which of the following is a true statement? 
 
(A) Because the speed of the first quartile on the roads with art is less than the minimum 
speed on the roads without art, it is not likely that drivers on roads with art travel at 
slower speeds. 
 
(B) Because the range of the speeds for roads with art and the range of the speeds for 
roads without art are each approximately 20 mph, it is likely that drivers on roads with 
art do not travel at slower speeds. 
 
(C) Because the interquartile range of the speeds on the roads with art is less than the 
interquartile range of the speeds on the roads without art, it is likely that drivers on 
roads with art travel at slower speeds. 
 
(D) Because the maximum speed on the roads with art is greater than the median speed 
on the roads without art, it is likely that drivers on roads with art travel at slower speeds. 
 
(E) Because each value of the five-number summary for the roads with art is less than 
the corresponding value of the five-number summary for the roads without art, it is 
likely that drivers on roads with art travel at slower speeds. 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

14. Spam e-mail (unwanted electronic mail) is usually sent in bulk to a large list of 
recipients. A large e-mail - service provider estimates that 4 percent of all e-mails are 
spam. 
In a random sample of 50 e-mails processed by the service provider, which of the 
following is the approximate probability that the sample will have at least 3 spam  
e-mails? 
 
(A) 0.1391 
 
(B) 0.1842 
 
(C) 0.3233 
 
(D) 0.6767 
 
(E) 0.8609 
 
 
 
 
15. A company owns a group of 50 cars, all the same make, model, and year. The group 
has a mean fuel economy 𝜇= 23.2 miles per gallon ( mpg ) and a standard deviation    
𝜎= 2.4mpg. A simple random sample of 4 cars from the group will be selected. 
What are the mean and standard deviation of the sampling distribution of the sample 
mean fuel economy for samples of size 4? 
 
(A) Mean = 23.2mpg, standard deviation = 2.4mpg 
 
(B) Mean = 23.2mpg, standard deviation = 1.2mpg 
 
(C) Mean = 23.2mpg, standard deviation = 0.6mpg 
 
(D) Mean = 11.6mpg, standard deviation = 2.4mpg 
 
(E) Mean = 11.6mpg, standard deviation = 1.2mpg 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

16. A factory that manufactures glass has two shifts of workers: a daytime shift and an 
evening shift. A random sample of 200 pieces of glass was selected from each shift, and 
the pieces were carefully inspected for defects. From the daytime shift, 12 pieces of glass 
were defective. From the evening shift, 15 pieces of glass were defective. 
Assuming all conditions for inference are met, which of the following gives a 98 percent 
confidence interval for the difference (daytime shift minus evening shift) in the 
population proportion of defective glass for the two shifts? 
 
(A) (12 −15) ± 2.05√(0.06)(0.94)
200
+
(0.075)(0.925)
200
 
 
(B) (12 −15) ± 2.33√(0.06)(0.94)
200
+
(0.075)(0.925)
200
 
 
(C) (0.06 −0.075) ± 2.33√(0.06)(0.94)
200
+
(0.075)(0.925)
200
 
 
(D) (0.06 −0.075) ± 2.05√(0.0675)(0.9325)
200
+
(0.0675)(0.9325)
200
 
 
(E)  (0.06 −0.075) ± 2.33√(0.0675)(0.9325)
200
+
(0.0675)(0.9325)
200
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

17. Information obtained from a random sample of 40 entry-level lawyers working in a 
certain country was used to calculate a 95 percent confidence interval for the true mean 
salary of all entry-level lawyers in the country. The confidence interval is 
($56,100, $58,900 ). 
 
Assume the conditions for inference are met. Which of the following statements is 
correct? 
 
(A) Because the interval includes the value of $58,000, the confidence interval provides 
convincing statistical evidence at the 𝛼= 0.05 level of significance that the average salary 
for entry-level lawyers in the country is $58,000. 
 
(B) Because the interval includes the value of $58,000, the confidence interval does not 
provide convincing statistical evidence at the 𝛼= 0.05 level of significance that the 
average salary for entry-level lawyers in the country is different from $58,000. 
 
(C) Because the center of the confidence interval is $57,500, there is convincing 
statistical evidence at the 𝛼= 0.05 level of significance that the average salary for entry-
level lawyers in the country is $57,500. 
 
(D) Because all of the values in the interval are less than $60,000, the confidence interval 
does not provide convincing statistical evidence at the 𝛼= 0.05 level of significance that 
the average salary for entry-level lawyers in the country is different from $60,000. 
 
(E) Because the interval begins at $56,100, no lawyer in the sample had a salary less than 
that amount. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

18. A report was published on the number of children under the age of 18 per household 
in a certain country. A researcher for a city in that country wants to determine whether 
the distribution of the number of children per household in the city is different from that 
of the country as a whole. The researcher selected a random sample of 200 houscholds 
from the city and obtained information on the number of children in each household. 
The table displays the percentage of households in the country with the corresponding 
number of children. The observed number of households with the corresponding 
number of children from the random sample of 200 households in the city is also shown. 
Number of Children 
Number of children 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 or more 
Percentage of all 
the country's households 
20% 
39% 
25% 
10% 
6% 
Observed number of households 
24 
68 
66 
20 
22 
 
Assuming all conditions for inference are met, which of the following is an appropriate 
hypothesis test for the researcher to use? 
 
(A) One-sample z −test for a population proportion 
(B) Two-sample z −test for a difference in population proportion 
(C) Chi-square test for goodness of fit 
(D) Chi-square test for homogeneity 
(E) Chi-square test for independence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

19. A researcher at a car manufacturing company was interested in knowing whether the 
type of car a driver uses the most (gasoline, hybrid, or electric) varied from Country A to 
Country B. The researcher obtained a random sample of 1,000 car owners living in 
Country A and a separate random sample of 2,000 car owners living in Country B. The 
following table lists the frequencies for the type of car the driver uses the most among 
the car owners who were sampled from each country. 
Type of Car Most Used for Each Country 
 
Gasoline 
Hybrid 
Electric 
Total 
Country A 
647 
203 
150 
1,000 
Country B 
554 
1,294 
152 
2,000 
Total 
1,201 
1,497 
302 
3,000 
 
Based on the data in the table, which of the following statements is true? 
 
(A) The proportion of hybrid or electric cars in Country A's sample is more than the 
proportion of hybrid or electric cars in Country B's sample. 
 
(B) The proportion of gasoline cars in Country A's sample is less than the proportion of 
electric cars in Country B's sample. 
 
(C) The proportion of gasoline cars in Country A's sample is equal to the proportion of 
hybrid cars in Country B's sample. 
 
(D) The proportion of electric cars is the same for both samples. 
 
(E) The proportion of gasoline cars is the highest in both samples. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

20. The owner of a large peach orchard has both genetically modified (GM) peach trees 
and traditional peach trees in the orchard. The orchard has hundreds of each type of 
peach tree. The owner believes that on average the GM peach trees produce heavier 
peaches than the traditional peach trees. To test this belief, the owner randomly sampled 
50 GM peaches and 50 traditional peaches and weighed each peach. The owner 
conducted a two-sample 𝑡-test for the difference in the population mean weight of 
peaches for the two types of peach trees. The 𝑝-vulue of the test is 0.12 . 
Which of the following is an appropriate conclusion for the owner to make at a 5% level 
of significance? 
 
(A) The owner fails to reject the null hypothesis and does not have convincing statistical 
evidence that the GM trees produce heavier peaches, on average, compared to the 
traditional tress. 
 
(B) The owner fails to reject the null hypothesis and has convincing statistical evidence 
that the GM trees produce heavier peaches, on average, compared to the traditional 
trees. 
 
(C) The owner rejects the null hypothesis and does not have convincing statistical 
evidence that the GM trees produce heavier peaches, on average, compared to the 
traditional trees. 
 
(D) The owner rejects the null hypothesis and has convincing statistical evidence that the 
GM trees produce heavier peaches, on average, compared to the traditional trees. 
 
(E) The owner should not make a conclusion because the sample size is not large enough 
to satisfy the normality condition for the test. 
 
 
21. At a wedding, guests will be asked what type of meal they want. Let 𝑉 be the event 
that a guest will select the vegetarian dinner and 𝐶 be the event that the guest will select 
the chicken dinner. Let 𝑃(𝑉) = 0.3, 𝑃(𝐶) = 0.7, and 𝑃(𝑉∪𝐶) = 1.0. 
Which of the following statements must be true? 
 
(A) The events 𝑉 and 𝐶 are mutually exclusive because the probability of both events 
happening is 0. 
 
(B) The events 𝑉 and 𝐶 are independent because the probability of both events 
happening is 0. 
 
(C) The events 𝑉 and 𝐶 are mutually exclusive becanse the probability of both events 
happening is 1. 
 
(D) The events 𝑉 and 𝐶 are independent because the probability of both events 
happening is 1. 
 
(E) The events 𝑉 and 𝐶 are both independent and mutually exclusive because the 
probability of both events happening is 0. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

22. For which of the following distributions is the mean clearly greater than the median? 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

23. The scatterplots for five different sets of bivariate quantitative data are shown. The 
correlation coefficient for two of the scatterplots are 𝑟= −0.656 and 𝑟= 0.907. 
Graph I                                                     Graph II                                                     Graph III 
 
               
                   
 
 
                                  Graph IV                                                Graph V 
                     
                      
 
 
Which of the following matches the graph with the correct correlation coefficient? 
 
(A) Graph I: 𝑟= −0.656;      Graph II: 𝑟= 0.907 
 
(B) Graph I: 𝑟= −0.656;      Graph III: 𝑟= 0.907 
 
(C) Graph IV: 𝑟= −0.656;   Graph III: 𝑟= 0.907 
 
(D) Graph V: 𝑟= −0.656;    Graph II: 𝑟= 0.907 
 
(E) Graph V: 𝑟= −0.656;     Graph III: 𝑟= 0.907 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

24. A number cube has six sides, each with equal probability of landing face-up when 
rolled, which is also known as a fair number cube. A statistics teacher is trying to create a 
six-sided number cube where each side does: have an equal probability of landing face-
up when rolled. A claim is made that after baking a fair number cube for 10 minutes at 
175 degrees Fahrenheit (  ∘F ), each face will no longer have an equal probability of 
landinge face-up when the number cube is rolled. Thus, the distribution of the number 
landing facc-up will not be uniform. To test this claim, the statistics teacher baked a fair 
number cube for 10 minutes at 175∘F and recorded the results of 200 number cube rolls, 
shown in the following table. 
Results from 200 Rolls of Baked Number Cube 
Number Landing 
Face-Up 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Frequency 
24 
34 
32 
31 
33 
46 
 
All conditions for inference were met, and the test statistic and 𝑝-value for the 
appropriate hypothesis test were 7.66 and 0.176, respectively. 
Which of the following statements is the best interpretation of the 𝑝-value? 
 
(A) The probability is 0.176 that the distribution of the number landing face-up is 
uniform after the number cube is baked. 
 
(B) The probability is 0.176 that the distribution of the number landing face-up is not 
uniform after the number cube is baked. 
 
(C) The probability of observing the distribution of the number landing face-up in the 
table is 0.176. 
 
(D) If the distribution of the number landing face-up is uniform, the probability of 
observing a test statistic at least 7.66 is 0.176. 
 
(E) If the distribution of the number landing face-up is uniform, the probability of 
observing a test statistic at most 7.66 is 0.176. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

25. A large regional sports league wants all teams to use the same airline company when 
they travel on Fridays to a particular city for games. The league wants to ensure the 
teams arrive on time as often as possible. The league records all arrivals (both on-time 
and late) for six airline companies on all Fridays for the past year to that city. The bar 
chart displays the number of on-time arrivals for the six companies. 
Airline On-Time Arrivals 
 
Based on the bar chart, which airline company should the league select so that the teams 
are more likely to arrive on time? 
 
(A) Airline 6, because Airline 6 has the largest number of on-time arrivals. 
 
(B) Airline 2, because Airline 2 has the fewest flights, so it is more likely that the airline 
can arrive on time. 
 
(C) A decision cannot be made because this is categorical data. The airlines could have 
been presented in any order on the bar chart; thus the data will be skewed. 
 
(D) A decision cannot be made based on frequency. A comparison of the relative 
frequency of on-time arrivals for each of the six airline companies is needed. 
 
(E) A decision cannot be made because the data are based on a census. A random sample 
of Fridays would be required. 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

26. At a grocery store, there are three self-checkout stations for customers to complete 
their purchases. Let 𝑋= the number of self-checkout stations being used by customers at 
any given time. The probability distribution of 𝑋 is given in the following table. 
Probability Distribution of Self-Checkout Station Use 
𝑥 
0 
1 
2 
3 
𝑃(𝑋= 𝑥) 
0.08 
0.22 
0.32 
0.38 
 
The mean of 𝑋 is 2. Which of the following is closest to the standard deviation of 𝑋 ? 
 
(A) 0.92 
 
(B) 0.96 
 
(C) 1.08 
 
(D) 1.29 
 
(E) 2.22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

27. There is a certain compound found in the cacao plant that can affect blood pressure. 
A researcher is studying whether adding a capsule that contains this compound along 
with regular medication will aid in reducing blood pressure. The researcher recruited 22 
volunteer patients who had approximately the same blood pressure and were taking the 
same brand of blood pressure medicine.  The researcher randomly assigned 11 of the 
volunteers to take the compound capsule along with their current medication and the 
other 11 of the volunteers to take a placebo capsule along with their current medication. 
After one month, the systolic blood pressure in millimeters of mercury (mmHg), was 
taken for the volunteers and recorded. The table displays summary statistics for the 
systolic blood pressure for each group of volunteers. 
Summary Statistics for Systolic Blood Pressure 
 
Number of 
Volunteers 
Mean 
(mmHg) 
Standard 
Deviation 
(mmHg) 
Compound 
capsule 
11 
118.6 
5.35 
Placebo capsule 
11 
123.5 
6.53 
 
Assuming a conditions for inference are met, which of the following is a 95 percent 
confidence interval for the difference between the means of the systolic blood pressure 
(compound minus placebo), in mmHg, for all patients similar to those in the study? 
 
(A) (−6.68, −3.12) 
 
(B) (−6.83, −2.97) 
 
(C) (−9.30, −0.50) 
 
(D) (−9.90, 0.09) 
 
(E) ( −10.22, 0.42) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

28. A strong, heat-resistant synthetic fiber currently used in manufacturing has a mean 
strength of 1.62 gigapascal (GPa). Scientists believe that spider silk, a natural material, is 
stronger on average than the currently used fiber. A scientist randomly selected 10 
strands of spider silk and determined the strength of each strand. The sample mean 
strength was 1.87 GPa with a sample standard deviation of 0.26 GPa. The scientist 
conducted an appropriate test of significance for the following hypotheses. 
HB:𝜇silk = 1.62
Ha: 𝜇silk > 1.62 
Assuming all conditions for inference are met, what are the values of the appropriate test 
statistic and associated 𝑝-value? 
 
(A) 𝑧= 0.96, 𝑝-value = 0.1681 
 
(B) 𝑧= 3.04, 𝑝-value = 0.0012 
 
(C) 𝑡= 0.96, 𝑝-value = 0.1807 
 
(D) 𝑡= 3.04, 𝑝-value = 0.0140 
 
(E) 𝑡= 3.04, 𝑝-value = 0.0070 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

29. Farmer Jones and Farmer O'Grady grow avocados in two different states. The 
farmers want to estimate the difference in the proportion of avocados from their large 
farms that cannot be sold because they are rotten. 
Which of the following combinations of sample sizes and proportions of rotten avocados 
for each of the two farms would not allow the farmers to assume the sampling 
distribution of the difference in sample proportions of rotten avocados will have an 
approximately normal distribution? 
 
(A) Farmer Jones takes a sample of size 100 and observes that the proportion of 
avocados that are rotten is 0.40. Farmer O'Grady takes a sample of size 50 and observes 
that the proportion of avocados that are rotten is 0.20. 
 
(B) Farmer Jones takes a sample of size 100 and observes that the proportion of 
avocados that are rotten is 0.12. Farmer 0 'Grady takes a sample of size 50 and observes 
that the proportion of avocados that are rotten is 0.06. 
 
(C) Farmer Jones takes a sample of size 200 and observes that the proportion of 
avocados that are rotten is 0.40. Farmer O'Grady takes a sample of size 100 and observes 
that the proportion of avocados that are rotten is 0.20. 
 
(D) Farmer Jones takes a sample of size 200 and observes that the proportion of 
avocados that are rotten is 0.06. Farmer O'Grady takes a sample of size 200 and 
observes that the proportion of avocados that are rotten is 0.06. 
 
(E) Farmer Jones takes a sample of size 300 and observes that the proportion of 
avocados that are rotten is .0.06. Farmer O'Grady takes a sample of size 50 and observes 
that the proportion of avocados that are rotten is 0.20. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

30. A wildlife sanctuary is a place where wild animals are kept safe. A researcher at a 
certain sanctuary is interested in the relationship between weight and average daily 
amount of water consumed by lions in the sanctuary. To investigate this relationship, the 
researcher selected a random sample of 20 lions from the sanctuary. The weight, in 
pounds, and the average daily amount of water consumed, in ounces, was recorded for 
each lion for a period of 5 days. From the data, a least-squares regression model was 
constructed using weight as the explanatory variable and average daily amount of water 
consumed as the response variable. A computer summary of the least-squares regression 
model is shown in the following table. 
Regression Output 
Predictor 
Coefficient 
SE of Coefficient 
𝑇 
𝑝-Value 
Constant 
32.239 
12.781 
2.522 
0.021 
Weight 
0.039 
0.093 
0.419 
0.680 
𝑆= 13.589 
𝑟2 = 0.010 
 
 
 
 
The researcher will use the regression results to test the hypotheses H0 : There is not a 
linear relationship between weight and average daily amount of water consumed by all 
lions in the sanctuary versus Ha : There is a linear relationship between weight and 
average daily amount of water consumed by all lions in the sanctuary. Assuming the 
conditions for inference were met, which of the following statements is true at the 0.05 
significance level? 
 
(A) Because the 𝑟2-value of 0.010 is less than 𝛼= 0.05, the data provide convincing 
statistical evidence of a linear relationship between weight and average daily amount of 
water consumed for all lions in the sanctuary. 
 
(B) Because the 𝑟2-value of 0.010 is less than 𝛼= 0.05, the data provide convincing 
statistical evidence of a linear relationship between weight and average daily amount of 
water consumed for the 20 lions in the study. 
 
(C) Because the 𝑝-value of 0.680 is greater than 𝛼= 0.05, the data provide convincing 
statistical evidence of a linear relationship between weight and average daily amount of 
water consumed for all lions in the sanctuary. 
 
(D) Because the 𝑝-value of 0.680 is greater than 𝛼= 0.05, the data do not provide 
convincing statistical evidence of a linear relationship between weight and average daily 
amount of water consumed for all lions in the sanctuary. 
 
(E) Because the 𝑝-value of 0.680 is greater than 𝛼= 0.05, the data do not provide 
convincing statistical evidence of a linear relationship between weight and average daily 
amount of water consumed for the 20 lions in the study. 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

31. According to an association of dentists, half of all adults over the age of 30 suffer 
from some form of gum disease. One indicator of the health of gums is the gap between 
the pocket of the gum and the nearby tooth, measured in millimeters (mm). These gap 
measurements range from 0 to 7 mm, with 0 indicating no gum disease and 7 indicating 
the most severe gum disease. 
 
A group of dentists claims that improving tooth-brushing techniques will decrease the 
greatest gap measurement on average, of patients in their largo practice. The dentists 
randomly select 32 patients from the approximately 1,500 patients in their dental 
practice and measure the greatest gap at the beginning and then again at the end of a 
three-year period of improved tooth-brushing techniques. Summary statistics of the 
measurements are displayed in the table. 
Summary Statistics for Greatest Gap Measurements 
 
𝑛 
Mean (mm) 
Standard Deviation (mm) 
Greatest gap at beginning of 
study 
32 
3.7 
0.62 
Greatest gap at end of study 
32 
3.5 
0.58 
Difference (beginning minus end) 
32 
0.2 
0.40 
 
Assuming all conditions for inference are met, which of the following is the correct value 
of the test statistic and 𝑝-value to test the dentists' claim? 
 
(A) Test statistic = 2.828, 𝑝-value = 0.0041 
 
(B) Test statistic = 2.828, 𝑝-value = 0.0081 
 
(C) Test statistic = 1.333, 𝑝-value = 0.0193 
 
(D) Test statistic = 1.333, 𝑝-value = 0.0938 
 
(E) Test statistic = 1.333, 𝑝-value = 0.1875 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

32. An aerial view of a large suburban area shows that 40 percent of the residences have 
gardens and 30 percent of the residences have solar panels. Among the residences with 
gardens, 50 percent have solar panels. 
If a residence is selected at random, what is the probability that the residence has a 
garden, solar panels, or both? 
 
(A) 0.20 
 
(B) 0.50 
 
(C) 0.55 
 
(D) 0.58 
 
(E) 0.70 
 
 
33. According to a recent survey, 40 percent of all households in a certain country have 
newspapers delivered to their homes. Holly, a local city manager, is investigating 
whether the percentage of households in her city that have newspapers delivered is 
different from the national percentage reported in the survey. The hypotheses for her 
investigation are H0: 𝑝= 0.40 versus Ha: 𝑝≠0.40, where 𝑝 is the proportion of all 
households in the city that have newspapers delivered. To test these hypotheses at the 
significance level of 𝛼= 0.05, Holly selected a simple random sample of 85 households. 
Among the households sampled, 42 reported having newspapers delivered. 
Assuming the conditions for inference are met, which of the following is the correct 
inference decision? 
 
(A) The 𝑝-value is larger than the significance level, so there is convincing statistical 
evidence that the proportion of city households that have newspapers delivered is equal 
to 0.40. 
 
(B) The 𝑝-value is larger than the significance level, so there is convincing statistical 
evidence that the proportion of city households that have newspapers delivered is 
different from 0.40. 
 
(C) The 𝑝-value is larger than the significance level, so there is not convincing statistical 
evidence that the proportion of city households that have newspapers delivered is 
different from 0.40. 
 
(D) The 𝑝-value is smaller than the significance level, so there is convincing statistical 
evidence that the proportion of city households that have newspapers delivered is equal 
to 0.40. 
 
(E) The 𝑝-value is smaller than the significance level, so there is convincing statistical 
evidence that the proportion of city households that have newspapers delivered is 
different from 0.40. 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

34. Ms. Sato, a president of a large university, is interested in estimating the proportion 
of students from the university who are fluent in more than one language. She takes a 
random sample of 2,200 students from the university. The 95 percent confidence 
interval she calculates to estimate the population proportion of students from the 
university who are fluent in more than one language is (0.274,0.312). 
Assuming all conditions for inference have been met, which of the following is the best 
interpretation of the 95 percent confidence interval? 
 
(A) Because zero is not contained within the confidence interval, it can be assumed that 
there is a difference in the proportion of students from the university who are fluent in 
more than one language. 
 
(B) The president can be 95% confident that the population proportion of students from 
the university who are fluent in more than one language is 0.293. 
 
(C) The president is confident that, in repeated sampling, 95% of the time, the sample 
proportion of students from the university who are fluent in more than one language will 
be 0.293. 
 
(D) The president is 95% confident because 95% of all samples will produce a confidence 
interval for the population proportion of students from the university who are fluent in 
more than one language between 0.274 and 0.312. 
 
(E) The president can be 95% confident that the population proportion of students from 
the university who are fluent in more than one language is between 0.274 and 0.312. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

35. A study was conducted to investigate the association between temperature and length 
of the wings of butterflies. A random sample of butterflies of a certain species was 
collected across a continent. On the day each butterfly was collected, the day's mean 
temperature at that location, in degrees Celsius (  ∘C ), and the butterfly's forewing 
length, in millimeters (mm), were recorded. From these data, a least-squares regression 
line was calculated to predict forewing length (mm) from mean temperature (  ∘C ). 
The equation of the least-squares regression line is 𝑦ˆ = 22.550 + 0.262𝑥, where 𝑥 is the 
mean temperature on the day each butterfly was collected and 𝑦 is the forewing length of 
the butterfly. 
On the day one butterfly in the sample was collected, the mean temperature was 20.80∘C 
and the forewing length of the butterfly was 27.15 mm. 
 
Using the least-squares regression line, which of the following is closest to the residual 
for this butterfly? 
 
(A) -6.68 mm 
 
(B) -0.85 mm 
 
(C) 0.26 mm 
 
(D) 0.85 mm 
 
(E) 28.00 mm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

36. According to a report, only 18 percent of all drivers can drive a car with a manual 
transmission. Mr. Jerry, a morning radio show host in a certain city, was curious to know 
whether the proportion of the show's listeners who can drive a car with a manual 
transmission is different from 0.18. He requested that listeners call the show and report 
whether they can drive a car with a manual transmission. Mr. Jerry did not have time to 
talk to everyone who called, so he took a random sample of the callers by rolling a die. 
Because the die landed on 5 , the fifth call was answered and then every fifth call after 
that one was answered until there were 40 responses from the 200 listeners who called. 
Of the callers who were selected, 25 percent stated that they can drive a car with a 
manual transmission. 
 
Which of the following is true about the results of the survey conducted by the radio 
host? 
 
(A) The radio host took a random sample of the callers, so the sample proportion of 0.25 
may be an accurate estimate of the true proportion of drivers in the city who can drive a 
car with a manual transmission. 
 
(B) The radio host took a random sample of the callers, so the sample proportion of 0.25 
may be an accurate estimate of the true proportion of morning radio show listeners who 
can drive a car with a manual transmission. 
 
(C) The radio host's sample size is more than 30%, so the sample proportion of 0.25 may 
be an accurate estimate of the true proportion of morning radio show listeners who can 
drive a car with a manual transmission. 
 
(D) The radio host's sample contains people who chose to participate, so 0.25 may not be 
an accurate estimate of the true proportion of morning radio show listeners who can 
drive a car with a manual transmission. 
 
(E) Because 40(0.18) = 7.2, which is not greater than 10, 0.25 may not be an accurate 
estimate of the true proportion of morning radio show listeners who can drive a car with 
a manual transmission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

37. In some years at a certain beach, loud concerts are held every weekend during the 
summer. In other years, there are no concerts held during the summer. A bird lover is 
concerned that the concerts affect the number of eggs a certain type of bird lays on the 
beach. 
The bird lover took a random sample of years with concerts and another random sample 
of years without concerts. Using available records, the bird lover recorded the number of 
eggs birds of the specified type laid on the beach each year. A two-sample 𝑡-test for the 
difference in population means was conducted, and the bird lover concluded the mean 
number of eggs the birds laid each year is significantly less in the years when there were 
summer concerts. 
Assuming the conditions for inference were met, which of the following is a correct 
statement about the conclusion that can be made from the study? 
 
(A) The concerts cause a decrease in the mean number of eggs the birds lay on that 
certain beach. 
 
(B) The concerts cause a decrease in the mean number of eggs the birds lay on all 
beaches with this type of bird. 
 
(C) The concerts do not cause a decrease in the mean number of eggs the birds lay on 
that certain beach. 
 
(D) It cannot be determined whether the concerts cause a decrease in the mean number 
of eggs the birds lay because this is an observational study. 
 
(E) It cannot be determined whether the concerts cause a decrease in the mean number 
of eggs the birds lay because the bird lover does not know whether the loudness of the 
concerts used each week is constant. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

38. In a certain large city, a recycling bin is considered to be used correctly if it does not 
contain any food or other biological waste (such as tissues or diapers).  In the city, 65 
percent of all households with recycling bins use the bins correctly. 
 
In a random sample of 600 households in the city, what are the mean, 𝜇, and standard 
deviation, 𝜎, of the number of households with recycling bins that use them correctly? 
 
 
(A) 𝜇= 600(0.65), 𝜎= √600(0.65)(0.35) 
 
(B) 𝜇= 600(0.35), 𝜎= √600(0.35)(0.65) 
 
(C) 𝜇= 600(0.35)(0.65), 𝜎= √600(0.65)(0.35) 
 
(D) 𝜇= 600(0.65), 𝜎= √(0.65)(0.35)
600
 
 
(E) 𝜇= 0.65, 𝜎= √(0.65)(0.35)
600
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

39. A company with many grocery stores buys grapefruit from two regions, X and Y. A 
produce buyer at the company believes that grapefruit grown in region 𝑋 weigh more, on 
average, than grapefruit grown in segion 𝑌. The buyer randomly selects and weighs 125 
grapefruits from each region. Let 𝜇𝑋 be the mean weight of all grapefruit from region X 
and let 𝜇Y be the mean weight of all grapefruit from region Y. The buyer uses the data to 
conduct a two-sample 𝑡-test to test the following hypotheses. 
𝐻0: 𝜇𝑋= 𝜇𝑌
𝐻a:𝜇X > 𝜇Y
 
The assumptions for inference are met, and the buyer makes a decision based on the 
data collected and the results of the inference test. 
Which of the following describes a Type II error for this test? 
 
 
(A) The buyer rejects the null hypothesis and determines there is convincing statistical 
evidence that 𝜇X > 𝜇Y, when in fact 𝜇X = 𝜇Y. 
 
(B) The buyer fails to reject the null hypothesis and determines there is convincing 
statistical evidence that 𝜇X < 𝜇Y, when in fact 𝜇X = 𝜇Y. 
 
(C) The buyer fails to reject the null hypothesis and determines there is not convincing 
statistical evidence that 𝜇X > 𝜇Y, when in fact 𝜇X > 𝜇Y. 
 
(D) The buyer rejects the null hypothesis and determines there is convincing statistical 
evidence that 𝜇X > 𝜇Y, when in fact 𝜇X > 𝜇Y. 
 
(E) The buyer fails to reject the null hypothesis and determines there is not convincing 
statistical evidence that 𝜇X > 𝜇Y, when in fact 𝜇X = 𝜇Y. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

40. For competition play, the mass of a tennis ball must be between 56.0 grams and 59.4 
grams. The distribution of the mass of tennis balls manufactured by a certain company is 
approximately normal with a mean of 57.7 grams. 
If 96 percent of all tennis balls made by the company meet the mass requirement for 
competition play, which of the following expressions is closest to the standard deviation 
of the distribution of the mass of tennis balls made by the company? 
 
(A) 
56.0−57.7
2.05
 grams 
 
(B) 
59.4−57.7
2.05
 grams 
 
(C) 
59.4−57.7
1.75
 grams 
 
(D) 2.05(59.4 −57.7) grams 
 
(E) 1.75(59.4 −57.7) grams 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

STATISTICS 
SECTION II 
Total Time- 1 hour and 30 minutes 
6 Questions 
 
 
SECTION II, Part A 
Suggested Time- 1 hour and 5 minutes 
5 Questions 
 
Directions: Show all your work. Indicate clearly the methods you use, because you will be 
scored on the correctness of your methods as well as on the accuracy and completeness 
of your results and explanations. 
1. Dexterity is a skill in performing tasks. A researcher studying hand dexterity in 
professional musicians wants to determine if there is a difference in hand dexterity 
between piano players and flute players. The researcher knows there are thousands 
of each type of musician. The researcher randomly selected 25 professional piano 
players and randomly selected 25 professional flute players to participate in a study. 
Each sampled musician completed a hand dexterity task and was given a dexterity 
score on a scale of 1 to 30. A score of 1 represents minimum dexterity, and a score of 
30 represents maximum dexterity. The histograms and the table display the 
researcher's results. 
Histograms and Summary Statistics of Hand Dexterity Scores for Professional Musicians 
 
                   
 
Hand Dexterity Score for Piano Players                    Hand Dexterity Score for Flute Players 
 
 
𝑛 
Mean 
Standard Deviation 
Piano players 
25 
17.28 
3.69 
Flute players 
25 
18.36 
2.33 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

At the 5 percent level of significance, is there convincing statistical evidence of a 
difference in the mean hand dexterity score between all professional plano players and 
all professional flute players? Complete the appropriate inference procedure to justify 
your response. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

2. Doctors are conducting an experiment to study whether a new cream reduces 
swelling in knees more effectively than an existing cream in people who have knee 
swelling. The new cream, Cream A, and the existing cream, Cream B, are both 
applied directly on the skin covering the knee. The doctors recruit 80 volunteers who 
have knee swelling to participate in the experiment. Each volunteer will be randomly 
assigned to use one of the two creams for a period of 12 weeks. The level of knee 
swelling will be rated by a doctor who does not know which cream the volunteer is 
using. The swelling will be rated on a scale of 1 to 10, with 1 being no swelling and 10 
being severe swelling. Each volunteer's knee swelling will be rated both before and 
after the 12 -week period. The change in the knee swelling rating (before minus after) 
will be recorded for each volunteer. 
 
(a) Identify the treatments and the response variable in this experiment. 
• 
Treatments: 
 
 
• 
Response variable: 
 
 
 
(b) The doctors want to assign the same number of volunteers to each treatment in this 
experiment. Describe how the doctors could assign the volunteers to the treatments 
using a completely randomized design. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

(c) Assume the conditions for inference are satisfied and a statistically significant 
difference in the mean change in the knee swelling rating between Cream 𝐴 and Cream 𝐵 
is observed. Can the results of this experiment be generalized to all people with knee 
swelling? Justify your response in context. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) Another doctor, Dr. Clayton, believes the initial severity of kee swelling (severe or 
mild) will influence the change in knee swelling rating over the 12-week period.  Dr. 
Clayton plans to assign all of the volunteers with severe knee swelling to Cream A and all 
of the volunteers with mild knee swelling to Cream B.  Explain why Dr. Clayton’s plan 
will be ineffective for determining whether Cream A or Cream B is a better treatment for 
knee swelling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

3. A car company is investigating whether offering an optional navigation system in their 
cars at a lower price will increase sales of the optional navigation system. The navigation 
system would give the driver directions to a destination. 
A researcher at the company surveyed a random sample of car owners who owned 
exactly one of their cars. Some of the cars already had the optional navigation system, 
and some did not. The researcher asked the car owners whether they would purchase the 
optional navigation system if offered at the lower price when they purchase their next 
car. 
The researcher found that 60 percent of owners had the optional navigation system. The 
researcher also found that 18 percent of owners said, "No, I would not purchase" the 
optional navigation system at the lower price. 6 percent of the owners had a car with the 
optional navigation system and said, "No, I would not purchase" the optional navigation 
system at the lower price. The following table summarizes this information. 
 
Car With Optional 
Navigation System 
Car Without Optional 
Navigation System 
Total 
No, I would not purchase 
0.06 
 
0.18 
Yes, I would purchase 
 
 
 
Total 
0.60 
 
 
 
(a) Determine the probabilities for the empty cells in the table. Write your answers in the 
table. 
 
 
 
(b) Given that a randomly selected car owner has a car without the optional navigation 
system, calculate the probability that the owner said, "Yes, I would purchase," Use 
the results in the table completed in part (a), 1 show your work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

(c) Are the events "Car without optional navigation system" and saying "Yes, I would 
purchase" independent events? Justify your answer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d)  Consider your previous results. Should the car company offer the optional 
navigation system at the lower price? Justify your answer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

4. A survey of 500 randomly sampled city residents was conducted to investigate 
whether residents support a proposal to build a new dog park in the city. Table 1 shows 
the results of the survey categorized by voting district and response. 
 
Table 1: Residents' Responses to the Proposal by District 
Voting District 
Support for 
the Proposal 
Against the 
Proposal 
Total 
District A 
88 
112 
200 
District B 
72 
128 
200 
District C 
80 
20 
100 
Total 
240 
260 
500 
 
(a) Based on Table 1, did the majority of the residents surveyed respond that they would 
support the proposal to build a new dog park? Justify your answer in context. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) (i) Calculate the conditional relative frequencies of "Support for the proposal" and 
"Against the proposal" for each voting district. Show your work and write your answers 
in Table 2. 
Table 2: Conditional Relative Frequencies for Residents' Responses to the 
Proposal by District 
Voting District 
Support for 
the Proposal 
Against the 
Proposal 
Total 
District A 
 
 
1.0 
District B 
 
 
1.0 
District C 
 
 
1.0 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

(ii) Using Table 2, construct a segmented bar chart that shows the conditional relative 
frequencies of responses to the proposal to build a new dog park for each of the voting 
districts. 
 
 
 
(c) Explain how using only the segmented bar chart in part (b-ii) could lead to an 
incorrect interpretation of how the surveyed city residents feel about the proposal to 
build the new dog park. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

5. Paul is an electrical engineer at a company that produces integrated circuits. 
Integrated circuits are tiny digital circuits that work together to run an electronic device. 
Twenty integrated circuits are produced on a single sheet of copper foil. The sheet is 
divided into four quadrants with five integrated circuits located in each quadrant, as 
shown in the diagram. Each individual circuit is labeled with a letter from A to T. 
 
 
 
Paul wants to make sure the circuits on a certain sheet are of high quality. He will take a 
sample of five circuits from that sheet. 
 
(a) Paul will randomly select one of the four quadrants and sample all the circuits in that 
quadrant. 
(i) Identify Paul's sampling method. 
 
 
(ii) Determine the probability that circuit D is in Paul's sample. 
 
 
 
(b) Consider Paul's sampling method from part (a). Let 𝐷 represent the event that Paul 
selects circuit 𝐷 in the sample, and let 𝑇 represent the event that Paul selects circuit T in 
the sample. 
 
(i) Are the events 𝐷 and 𝑇 mutually exclusive? Justify your response. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

(ii) Are the events 𝐷 and 𝑇 independent? Justify your response. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) Paul needs to make sure the millions of circuits the company produces are of high 
quality. To check the quality, he will periodically take a sample of circuits from a sheet 
using the method described in part (a). To automate the selection process, Paul will write 
a computer program to randomly select a quadrant from a sheet. The program is 
working correctly if, in the long run, each of the quadrants is equally likely to be chosen. 
To investigate whether his program is working correctly, Paul will run his program for 
1,000 sheets and record the quadrant that is randomly selected for each sheet. 
 
(i) Identify the inference test Paul should use to investigate whether the program is 
working correctly. Do not conduct the test. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Identify the hypotheses for the inference test identified in part (c-i). Do not conduct 
the test 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

SECTION II, Part B 
Suggested Time- 𝟐𝟓 minutes 
 
Directions: Show all your work. Indicate clearly the methods you use, because you will be 
scored on the correctness of your methods as well as on the accuracy and completeness 
of your results and explanations. 
 
6. Three months from now, all of the parents/guardians of elementary school students in 
a certain large school district will vote either yes or no on a new electronic tablet 
program. This program will allow every elementary school student within the school 
district to be issued a tablet. In a recent survey of a random sample of 300 
parents/guardians of elementary school students, 146 out of 300 ( 48.7 percent) 
indicated they would vote yes in favor of such a program. 
Mr. Robinson, the technology expert at the school district, is in favor of the elementary 
students being issued a tablet. He develops a pamphlet showing the educational benefits 
of students having their own tablet. He did this to increase the proportion of 
parents/guardians voting yes. To investigate the effectiveness of the pamphlet, Mr. 
Robinson distributed the pamphlet to the same 300 parents/guardians from the original 
sample. After reading the pamphlet, each parent/guardian was asked again whether each 
elementary student should be issued a tablet. Parents/guardians could change their 
answer or keep the same answer from the original survey. The results of the 
parent/guardian replies are shown in the table. 
 
YES, after reading 
the pamphlet 
NO, after reading 
the pamphlet 
Total 
YES, before reading the pamphlet 
110 
36 
146 
NO, before reading the pamphlet 
69 
85 
154 
Total 
179 
121 
300 
 
(a) Consider the data shown in the table. 
 
(i) 
What proportion of the parents/guardians of elementary school students said 
YES after reading the pamphlet? 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

(ii) 
What proportion of parents/guardians of elementary school students said YES 
after reading the pamphlet given they said NO before reading the pamphlet? 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Robinson wants to conduct an inference test to investigate whether reading the 
pamphlet will result in a change in the level of support among all parents/guardians of 
elementary school students in the district for the tablet program when they vote in three 
months. 
 
(b) Mr. Robinson is considering the use of a 𝑧-test for a difference of two population 
proportions for his inference test. 
 
(i) What are the conditions of a 𝑧-test for a difference of two population proportions? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Explain why a 𝑧-test for a difference of two population proportions is not an 
appropriate test for Mr. Robinson to use. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

The table of parent/guardian replies is repeated here. 
 
YES, after reading 
the pamphlet 
NO, after reading 
the pamphlet 
Total 
YES, before reading the pamphlet 
110 
36 
146 
NO, before reading the pamphlet 
69 
85 
154 
Total 
179 
121 
360 
 
The district statistician explains to Mr. Robinson that the appropriate inference test to 
use is called McNemar's chi-square test. The hypotheses for McNemar's test are shown 
here. 
H0:𝑝1 = 𝑝2
H2:𝑝1 ≠𝑝2
 
Let 𝑝1 be the proportion of all parents / guardians of elementary school students in the 
district who would say NO before reading the pamphlet and would say YES after reading 
the pamphlet. Let 𝑝2 be the proportion of all parents/ guardians of elementary school 
students in the district who would say YES before reading the pamphlet and would say 
NO after reading the pamphlet. 
To apply McNemar's test in this study, consider only the 105 responses of the parents/ 
guardians whose opinions changed ( i.e., 69 from NO to YES and 36 from YES to NO). 
McNemar's test statistic is given by 
𝑥2 = (𝑏−𝑐)2
𝑏+ 𝑐 
where 𝑏 represents the number of parents/guandians in the sample that said NO before 
reading the pamphlet and YES afier reading the pamphlet and 𝑐 represents the number 
of parents/guardians in the sample that said YES before reading the pamphlet and NO 
after reading the pamphlet: 
 
(c) (i) Assume all conditions for McNemar's test have been met. Calculate the test 
statistic using the sample data from Mr Robinson's study. Show your work. 
 
 
 
 
 


--- PAGE BREAK ---

(ii) Assuming the null hypothesis is true, McNemar's test statistic, 𝜒2, is distributed 
approximately as a chi-square statistic with 1 degree of freedom. Determine the 𝑝-value 
for Mr. Robinson's test using the test statistic found in part ( c −i ). 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
(i) Using your results in part (c), what should Mr. Robinson conclude for his 
hypothesis test at a significance level of 0.05? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) Recall that Mr. Robinson's goal was to increase support for the tablet program. Using 
only the 105 responses of the parents/guardians whose opinions changed, explain how 
Mr. Robinson might conclude the pamphlet increases support for the tablet program. 
